The Project Gutenberg EBook of The Golden Slave, by Poul Anderson

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online at
www.gutenberg.org.  If you are not located in the United States, you'll
have to check the laws of the country where you are located before using
this ebook.



Title: The Golden Slave

Author: Poul Anderson

Release Date: April 12, 2019 [EBook #59258]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE GOLDEN SLAVE ***




Produced by Greg Weeks, Mary Meehan and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net









                           The Golden Slave

                             POUL ANDERSON

                          AVON BOOK DIVISION
                        The Hearst Corporation
                           959 Eighth Avenue
                          New York 19, N. Y.

                           An Avon Original

                   Copyright, 1960, by Poul Anderson

 [Transcriber's Note: Extensive research did not uncover any evidence
       that the U.S. copyright on this publication was renewed.]

               Published by arrangement with the author

                        Printed in the U. S. A.


       *       *       *       *       *

Cordelia lay on the couch before him

Light rippled along her gown of sheerest silk, and her flesh seemed to
glow through.

Beside her the table bore wine and food prepared for two.

Eodan gaped.

"Hail Cimbrian," Cordelia raised her hand and beckoned him. "Come," she
said.

Eodan swayed toward her, the blood roaring in his temples.

"Will you drink with me?" she asked softly.

"Yes," he answered thickly.

Their hands touched as she poured the wine into his goblet, and he felt
his flesh leap with excitement.

"My husband was wrong to set a king to work in his fields," she
murmured. "Perhaps we two can reach a better understanding."

She lifted her goblet. "To our tomorrows, may they be better than our
yesterdays."

They drank in turn.

Suddenly her arms went around him and her mouth was hot on his. "I
meant this to be leisurely with much fine play," she whispered. "But
that would be wrong with you. I see it now."




                             AUTHOR'S NOTE


This might have happened. The Cimbri are still remembered by the old
district name Himmerland. Plutarch describes the battle at Vercellae,
which took place 101 B.C., and its immediate aftermath. Other classical
writers, such as Tacitus and Strabo, and a treasure of archeological
material enable us to guess at the Cimbri themselves. Apparently
they were a Germanic tribe from Jutland, with some elements of
Celtic culture; by the time they reached Italy they had grown into a
formidable confederation.

King Mithradates the Great (more commonly but less correctly spelled
Mithridates) is, of course, also historical. His expedition into
Galatia in 100 B.C. is not mentioned by the scanty surviving records;
but it is known that he had already fought with that strange kingdom
and annexed some of its territory, so border trouble followed by a
punitive sweep down past Ancyra is quite plausible.

At that time the area now called southern Russia was dominated by
the Alanic tribes, among whom the Rukh-Ansa were prominent. They are
presumably identical with the "Rhoxolani" whom Mithradates' general
Diophantus defeated at the Crimea about 100 B.C.

The tradition described in the epilogue may be found in the
thirteenth-century _Heimskringla_ and, in a different form, in the
chronicle of Saxo Grammaticus.

Otherwise my sources are the usual ancient and modern ones. I have
tried to keep the framework of verifiable historical fact accurate. For
whatever brutality, licentiousness and unreasonable prejudice is shown
by the people concerned, I apologize, adding only that by the standards
of the modern free world the era was a good deal worse than I care to
describe explicitly.

For the sake of connotation, cities and other political units are
generally referred to by their classical rather than contemporary
names. It should be obvious from context where any particular spot lies
on the map. However, the following list of geographical equivalents may
be found interesting.

    Ancyra: Ankara, Turkey
    Aquitania: West central France
    Arausio: Orange, France
    Asia: In ordinary Roman usage, the modern Asia Minor plus India
    Byzantium: Istanbul, Turkey
    Cimberland: Himmerland, northern Jutland, Denmark
    Cimmerian Bosporus: A Greek kingdom in the Crimea
    Colchis: Mingrelian Georgia, U.S.S.R.
    Dacia: Rumania
    Galatia: Central Turkey
    Gaul: France
    Halys River: Kizil River, Turkey
    Hellas: Greece
    Hellespont: Dardanelles
    Helvetia: Switzerland
    Macedonia: Northern Greece
    Massilia: Marseilles
    Narbonensis: Provence, i.e., southern France
    Noreia: Near Vienna, Austria
    Parthian Empire: Iran and Iraq
    Persia: Iran
    Pontus: Eastern half of northern Turkish coast, and southward
    Sinope: Sinop, Turkey
    Tauric Chersonese: The Crimea
    Trapezus: Trabzon, Turkey (medieval Trebizond)
    Vercellae: Vercelli, Italy, between Turin and Milan




                               100 B.C.


The Cimbrian hordes galloped across the dawn of history and clashed in
screaming battle against the mighty Roman legions.

Led by their chief, Boierik, and his son, Eodan, the hungry and
homeless pagan tribes hurled back the Romans time after time in
their desperate search for land. But for all the burning towns, the
new-caught women weeping, the wine drunk, the gold lifted, the Cimbri
did not find a home.

And now it was over. At Vercellae the Roman armies shattered them
completely. Only a few survived--and for them death would have been
more merciful.

Eodan, the proud young chieftain, had been caught and sold into
slavery, his infant son murdered and his beautiful wife, Hwicca, taken
as a concubine.

But whips and slave chains could not break the spirit of this fiery
pagan giant who fought, seduced and connived his way to a perilous
freedom to rescue the woman he loved.




                           The Golden Slave




I


The night before the battle, there were many watchfires. As he walked
from the Cimbri, out into darkness, Eodan saw the Roman camp across the
miles as a tiny ring of guttering red. Now the search has ended, he
thought; this earth we shall have tomorrow, or be slain.

He thought, while his blood beat swiftly, I do not await my death.

Only the ghostliest edge of a moon was up, and the stars seemed blurred
after the mountain sky. He felt Italy's air as thick. And the ground
underfoot was dusty where tens of thousands of folk, their horses and
cattle, had tramped over ripening grain. A poplar grove nearby stood
unmoving in windless gloom. Suddenly, sharp as a thrown war-dart,
Eodan recalled Jutland, Cimberland--great rolling heathery hills and
storm-noisy oaks, a hawk wheeling in heaven and the far bright blink of
the Limfjord.

But that was fifteen years ago. His folk, angry with their gods, had
wandered since then to the world's edge. And now the Cimbrian bull must
meet for one last time that she-wolf they said guarded Rome. It was
unlucky to call up forsaken places in your head.

Besides, thought Eodan, this was good land here. He could make it a
pastureland of horses ... yes, he might well take his share of Italy on
the Raudian plain, beneath the high Alps.

The night was hot. He rested his spear in the crook of an arm while
he took off his wolfskin cloak. Under it he wore the legginged coarse
breeches of any Cimbrian warrior; but his shirt was red silk, made
for him by Hwicca from a looted bolt of cloth. The twining leaves
and leaping stags of the North looked harsh across its shimmer. He
wore a golden torque around his neck, gold rings on his arms and a
tooled-leather belt heavy with silver god-masks. The dagger it held
bore a new hilt of ivory on the old iron blade. The Cimbri had reaved
from many folk, until their wagons were stuffed with wealth. Yet it was
only land they sought.

There was not much more air to be found beyond the watchfires than
within the camp. And it was hardly less full of noise here: the cattle
lowed enormously outside the wagons, one great clotted mass of horned
flesh. Eodan remembered Hwicca and turned back again.

A guard hailed him as he passed. "Hoy, there, Boierik's son, are you
wise to go out alone? _I_ would have scouts in the dark, to slice any
such throat that offered itself."

Eodan grinned and said scornfully, "How many miles away would you hear
a Roman, puffing and clanking on tiptoe?"

The warrior laughed. A Cimbrian of common mold, the wagons held
thousands like him. A big man, with heavy bones and thews, his skin was
white where sun and wind and mountain frosts had not burned it red, his
eyes were snapping blue under shaggy brows. He wore his hair shoulder
length, drawn into a tail at the back of the head; his beard was
braided, and his face and arms showed the tattoo marks of tribe, clan,
lodge or mere fancy. He bore an iron breastplate, a helmet roughly
hammered into the shape of a boar's head and a painted wooden shield.
His weapons were a spear and a long single-edged sword.

Eodan himself was taller even than most of the tall Cimbri. His
eyes were green, set far apart over high cheekbones in a broad,
straight-nosed, square-chinned face. His yellow hair was cut like
everyone else's, but like most of the younger men he had taken on the
Southland fashion of shaving his beard once or twice a week. His only
tattoo was on his forehead, the holy triskele marking him as a son of
Boierik, who led the people in wandering, war and sacrifice. The other
old ties, clan or blood brotherhood, had loosened on the long trek;
these wild, youthful horsemen were more fain for battle or gold or
women than for the rites of their grandfathers.

"And besides, Ingwar, there is a truce until tomorrow," Eodan went on.
"I thought everyone knew that. I and a few others rode with my father
to the Roman camp and spoke with their chief. We agreed where and when
to meet for battle. I do not think the Romans are overly eager to feed
the crows. They won't attack us beforehand."

Ingwar's thick features showed a moment's uneasiness in the wavering
firelight. "Is it true what I heard say, that the Teutones and Ambrones
were wiped out last year by this same Roman?"

"It is true," said Eodan. "When my father and his chiefs first went to
talk with Marius, to tell him we wanted land and would in turn become
allies of Rome, my father said he also spoke on behalf of our comrades,
those tribes which had gone to enter Italy through the western passes.
Marius scoffed and said he had already given the Teutones and Ambrones
their lands, which they would now hold forever. At this my father grew
angry and swore they would avenge that insult when they arrived in
Italy. Then Marius said, 'They are already here.' And he had the chief
of the Teutones led forth in chains."

Ingwar shuddered and made a sign against trolldom. "Then we are alone,"
he said.

"So much the more for us, when we sack Rome and take Italy's acres,"
answered Eodan gaily.

"But--"

"Ingwar, Ingwar, you are older than I. I had barely seen six winters
when we left Cimberland; you were already a wedded man. Must I then
tell you of all we have done since? How we went through forests and
rivers, over mountains, along the Danube year after year to Shar Dagh
itself ... and all the tribes there could not halt us--we reaped their
grain and wintered in their houses and rolled on in spring, leaving
their wives heavy with our children! How we smote the Romans at Noreia
twelve years ago, and again eight and four years ago--besides all the
Gauls and Iberians and the Bull knows how many others that stood in our
way--how we pushed one Roman army before us across the Adige, when they
would bar Italy--how this is the host they can hope to raise against
us, and we outnumber it perhaps three men to one!"

The victories rushed off Eodan's tongue, a river in springtime flood.
He thought of one Roman tribune after the next, tied like an ox to a
Cimbrian wagon, or stark on a reddened field among his unbreathing
legionaries. He remembered roaring songs and the whirlwind gallop
of Cimberland's young men, drunk with victory and the eyes of their
dear tall girls. It did not occur to him--then--how the trek had
nevertheless lasted for fifteen years, north and south, east and west,
from Jutland down to the Balkan spine and back to the Belgic plains,
from the orchards of Gaul to the gaunt uplands of Spain. And for all
the burning towns and weeping new-caught women, all the men killed and
all the gold lifted, the Cimbri had not found a home. There had been
too many people, forever too many; you could not plow when the very
earth spewed armed men up into your face.

"Well," said Ingwar. "Well, yes. Yes." He nodded his bushy head. "It's
plain to see whose son you are. His youngest, perhaps, not counting
the baseborn, but still son to Boierik. And that's something. Me, I am
only a crofter, or will be when I get my bit of land, but you'll be a
king or whatever they call it. So remember me, old Ingwar that bounced
you on his knee back home, and let me bring my mares for your fine
stallions to breed, eh?"

"Eh, indeed." Eodan slapped the broad back and went on into the camp.

The wagons were drawn up in many rings, the whole forming a circle
bound together by low breastworks of earth and logs. It seethed with
folk, there among the wheels. Even from his own height, Eodan could not
see far across that brawl of big fair men and free-striding girls.

Here a band of boys whooped and wrestled at a campfire, while an old
wife stirred a kettle of stew, naked towheaded children rolled in the
dust, dogs barked and horses stamped. There a gang of men knelt about
the dice, shouting as the wagers went, betting all they owned down to
their very weapons--for tomorrow they would settle with Marius and own
Rome herself. An aged bard, chilly even in summer, huddled into a worn
bearskin and listened dumbly to the war-song of a beardless lad whose
hands had already been bloodied. A youth and a maiden stole between
wagons, seeking darkness; her mother shook her head after them in some
bitterness, for it was not like the time when she was young--all this
rootless drifting had ended the staid old ways, and no good would
come of it. A thrall from the homeland, hairy and ragged, grabbed
lumberingly for a timid lass stolen out of Gaul, and got a kick and a
curse from the warrior who owned them both. A man whetted an ax against
tomorrow's use; beside him snored three friends, empty wine cups in
their hands. Here, there, here, there, it became one great whirl for
Eodan, and the voices and feet and ringing iron were like the surf he
had not heard in fifteen years.

He pushed his way through them all, grinning at those he knew, taking
a horn of beer offered by one man and a bite of blood sausage from
another, but not staying. Out there, alone in the night, he had
remembered Hwicca, and it came to him that the night was not so long
after all.

His own wagons stood near his father's, which were close to the
god-cars. In two of these lived the hags who tended the holy fire, took
omens and cast spells for luck--ugh, they looked like empty leather
sacks, and it was said they rode broomsticks through the air. But
another held the mightiest Cimbrian treasures, ancient lur horns and a
wooden earth-god and the huge golden oath-ring. Eodan and Hwicca had
laid their hands on that ring last year to be wedded. The Bull rode in
the same wagon, but tonight Boierik had ordered it set in an open cart,
that all might see it and be heartened. It was a heavy image, cast in
bronze, with horns that seemed to threaten the stars.

They had wandered far, the Cimbri, and they had lost much of old habit
and belief and belongingness. They were not even the Cimbri any longer.
That was only the chief tribe of many which had joined their trek.
There were other Jutes, driven from Jutland by the same succession of
wild wet years when no harvest ripened and hail fell like knuckle-bones
on Midsummer Eve. There were Germans gathered in along the way;
Helvetians from the Alps and Basques from the Pyrenees, neighbors to
the sky; even adventurous Celts, throwing in with these newcomers who
so merrily ransacked all nations. They had no gods in common, nor did
they care much for any gods; they had no high ancestors whose barrows
must be sacrificed to; they had not even a single language.

Red Boierik and the Bull held them together. Eodan, with scant
reverence for anything else, shaded his eyes in awe as he passed the
green, horned bulk of it.

Then he saw his own wagon and his best horses tethered beside it. A low
fire was burning, and Flavius was squatting above it, poking with a
stick.

"Well," said Eodan, "are you cold? Or afraid?"

The Roman stood up, slowly and easily as a cat. He wore only a rag of
a tunic, thrown him one day by his master, but he wore it like a toga
in the Senate. Men had advised Eodan not to trust such a thrall--stick
a spear in him, or at least beat the haughtiness out, or one day he'll
put a knife in your back. Eodan had disregarded them. Now and then
he would knock Flavius over with a single open-handed cuff, when the
fellow spoke too sharply, but nothing worse had been needed; and he was
more use than a dozen shambling Northern oafs.

"Neither," he said. "I wanted a little more light, to see the camp
better. This may be my last night in it."

"Hoy!" said Eodan. "Speak no unlucky words, or I'll kick your teeth in."

He made no move against the Roman. War or the chase were one thing;
beating those who could not fight back was another, a distasteful work.
Eodan laid the whip on his thralls less often than most. Lately he had
given Flavius the job, and the Roman had shown Roman skill at it.

"After all, master, I could have meant that tomorrow we will sleep in
Vercellae, and a few nights thereafter in Rome." Flavius smiled, the
odd closed-lipped smile with drooping eyelids that made Cimbrian men
somehow raw along the nerves but seemed to draw Cimbrian women. In
his mouth the rough, burring Northern language became something else,
almost a song.

He was about ten years older than Eodan, not as tall or as broad of
shoulder, but more supple. His skin was nearly as fair, though his hair
curled black; his face was narrow, smooth, with wide red lips, but his
jaw jutted, and his nose was curving chiseled beauty; his rust-colored
eyes had lashes a woman might envy. Four years as a Cimbrian slave had
put certain skills in his hands, but did not seem to have dulled his
gaze or numbed his tongue.

Eodan gave him a hard stare. "If I were you, not tied to the wheel
tonight and my fellows close by, I'd slip from here. You'd have a
better chance of escaping now than you ever had before."

"Not a good enough chance," said Flavius. "Tomorrow you will win and
I would be scourged or killed if caught. Or the Romans will win and I
shall be released. I can wait. My folk are older than yours--you are a
nation of children, but we are schooled in waiting."

"Which makes you less trouble to me!" laughed the Cimbrian. "You can be
my overseer, when I build my garth. I'll even get you a Roman wife."

"I told you I have one. Such as she is." Flavius grimaced delicately.
Eodan bristled. It meant nothing for Flavius to bed with thrall
women--any man would do that if no better were to be had. The ugly,
hardly understandable gossip about boys could be overlooked. But a
man's wife was his _wife_, sworn to him in the sight of proud folk.
Even if he did not get on with her, he was less than a man for speaking
her name badly before others.

Well--

"What is the Roman consul's name?" went on Flavius. "Not Catulus, whom
you beat at the Adige, but the new one they say has been given supreme
command."

"Marius."

"Ah, so. Gaius Marius, I am sure. I have met him. A plebeian, a
demagogue, a self-righteous and always angry creature who actually
boasts of knowing no Greek ... indeed. His one lonely virtue is that he
is a fiend of a soldier."

Flavius had murmured his remark in Latin. The Cimbric, the speech
of barbarians, could not have been used to say it. Eodan followed
him without much trouble; he had had Flavius teach him enough Latin
for everyday use, looking forward to the day when he dealt with many
Italian underlings.

Eodan said, "In my baggage cart you will find my chest of armor. Polish
the helmet and breastplate. I would look my best tomorrow." He paused
at the wagon. "And do not sit close to here."

Flavius chuckled. "Ah--I see what you have in mind. You are to be
envied. I know all Aristotle's criteria of beauty, but you sleep with
them!"

Eodan kicked at him, not very angrily. The Roman laughed, dodged and
slipped off into darkness. Eodan stared after him for a little, then
heard him strike up a merry melodious whistling.

It was the same air Gnaeus Valerius Flavius had been singing at Arausio
in Gaul, to hearten his fellow captives. That was after the Cimbri had
utterly smashed two consular armies, while Boierik was sacrificing all
the prisoners and booty to the river god. Ha, but the hag-wagon had
stunk of blood! Eodan had been a little sickened, as one helpless man
after another went to be hanged, speared, cut open and brains dashed
out--the river had been choked with the dead. He had heard Flavius
singing. He did not know Latin then, but he had guessed from the kind
of laughter (the Romans had laughed, waiting to be murdered!) that the
words were bawdy. On an impulse he had bought Flavius from the river
for a cow and calf. Later he had learned that he now owned a Roman of
the equestrian class, educated in Athens, possessor of rich estates and
tall ambitions, serving in the army as every wellborn Roman must.

Eodan went up two steps and drew aside the curtain in his doorway. This
was a chief's wandering home, drawn by four span of oxen, walled and
roofed against the rain.

"What is that?" The low woman-voice was taut. He heard her move in the
dark wagon body, among his racked weapons.

"I," he said. "Only I."

"Oh--" Hwicca groped to the door. The dim light picked out her
face--broad, snub-nosed, a little freckled, the mouth wide and soft,
the eyes like summer heavens. Her yellow hair fell so thickly past the
strong shoulders that he could hardly see her crouched body.

"Oh, Eodan, I was afraid."

Her hands felt cold, touching his. "Of a few Romans?" he asked.

"Of what could happen to you tomorrow," she whispered. "And even to
Othrik.... I thought you would not come at all tonight."

His arm slipped down under the wheaten mane, across her bare back, and
he kissed her with a gentleness he had never had for other women. It
was not only that she was his wife and had borne his son. Surely it was
not that she also came of a high Cimbrian house. But when he saw her it
was like a springtime within him, a Jutland spring in lost years when
the Maiden drove forth garlanded under blossoming hawthorns; and he
knew that being a man was more than mere war-readiness.

"I went out to look at things," he told her, "and spoke with some men
and with Flavius."

"So.... I fell asleep, waiting. I did not hear. Flavius sang me a song
to make me sleep when I could not ... he had first made me laugh, too."
Hwicca smiled. "He promised to bring me some of these flowers they
have--roses, he calls them--"

"That is enough of Flavius!" snapped Eodan. May the wind run off with
that Roman, he thought, the way he bewitches all women. I come back and
the first thing I hear from my wife is how wonderful Flavius is.

Hwicca cocked her head. "Do you know," she murmured, "I think you are
jealous? As if you had any reason!"

She withdrew. He followed, awkwardly taking off his clothes in the
black, cramped space. He heard Hwicca go to Othrik, the small, milky
wonder who would one day sit in _his_ high seat, and draw a skin over
the curled-up form. He waited on their own straw. Presently her arms
found him.




II


The Cimbri met the joint forces of Marius and Catulus on the Raudian
plain near the city Vercellae. It was on the third day before the new
moon in the month Sextilis, which is now called August. The Romans
numbered 52,300; no one had counted the Cimbri, but it is said each
side of their army took up thirty furlongs and that they had 15,000
horses.

Eodan led a wing of these. He was not on one of the shaggy,
short-legged, long-headed Northern ponies that had trotted across
Europe--the tall black stallion he had found in Spain snorted and
danced beneath him. He dreamed about herds of such horses, his own
stock on his own land. He would raise horses like none the world had
ever seen. Meanwhile he rode with silver-jingling harness to cast down
Consul Marius.

His big body strained against a plate of hammered iron; his helmet
carried the mask of a wolf, and plumes nodded above it; a cloak like
flame blew from his shoulders; he wore gilt spurs on boots inlaid with
gold. He shouted and bandied jokes--the lusty mirth of a stock-breeding
people--with comrades even younger than he, shook his lance to catch
the sun on its metal, put the aurochs horn to his lips and blew, till
his temples hammered, for the joy of hearing it. "_Hoy-ah_, there,
Romans, have you any word I can take to your wives? I'll see them
before you do!" And the young riders galloped in and out, back and
forth, till dust grayed their banners.

Boierik--huge and silent, scarred hawk face and grizzled red hair
beneath a horned helmet, armed with a two-pronged spear--rode more
steadily in the van of the army. And not all the Cimbri who marched
after the horses owned so much as an iron head covering: there were
many leather caps and arrows merely fire-hardened. Yet even some
bare-legged twelve-year-old boy, wielding no more than a sling, might
be wearing a plundered golden necklace.

The Romans waited, quiet under the eagles, their cuirasses and greaves,
oblong shields and round helmets blinding bright in the sun. Among them
waved officers' plumes and an occasional blue cloak, but they seemed
as much less colorful than the barbarians as they seemed smaller--a
dark short race with cropped hair and shaven chins, holding their ranks
stiff as death. Even their horsemen stood rigid.

Eodan strained his eyes through the dust that was around him like a
fog, kicked up by hoofs and feet. He could scarcely see his own folk;
now and then he caught the iron gleam of chains by which the Cimbri had
linked their front-line men together, to stand fast or die. He thought,
with a moment's unease, that it aided the Romans, not to be able to see
how great were the numbers they must face.... Then a war-horn screamed,
and he blew his own in answer and smote spurs into his horse.

Hoofs drummed beneath him. He heard the wild, lowing _du-du-du_ of the
holy lur horns; closer now, the Romans tubas brayed brass and the Roman
pipes skirled. He heard even the rattle of his own metal and the squeak
of leather. But then it was all drowned in the Cimbrian shouts.

"_Hau-hau-hau-hau-hoo!_" shrieked Eodan into his horse's blowing mane.
"_Hau, hau! Hee-ee-yi!_" So did we shout at Noreia, when Rome first
learned who we are; so did we cry on the Alps, when we romped naked in
the snow and slid down glaciers on our shields; so did we howl as we
ripped up a forest to dam the Adige, break the Roman bridge and wring
the eagle's neck! _Hee-hoo!_

It was a blink of time, and it was forever, before he saw the enemy
cavalry before him. A shape sprang out of whirling gray dust, a shadow,
a face. Eodan saw that the man's chin was scarred. He reached into his
belt, whipped out one of his darts, and hurled it. He saw it glance off
the Roman cuirass. He veered his horse to the right and shook his lance
as he went by.

Around him it was all thudding and yelling. He only glimpsed the Roman
charge, fragments through the dust, a helmet or a sword, once the eye
of a horse. He leaned low in the saddle and reached for his second
dart. The Cimbrian riders were moving slantwise across the advancing
Roman front, and only those on the left actually met that charge. Eodan
edged toward the fighting.

A mounted man loomed up, sudden as a thunderclap. Eodan threw the dart.
It struck the Roman's horse in a nostril, and blood squirted out. The
horse screamed and lunged. Eodan knew a moment of reproach; he had not
meant to hurt the poor beast! Then he was upon the enemy. The fellow
was too busy with his frantic mount to raise shield. Eodan drove his
lance two-handed into the man's throat. He toppled from his seat, and
the shaft was almost wrenched from Eodan's hands. With a single harsh
movement, he freed it, nearly falling himself.

Another shape came out of the racketing dust. Eodan was able to see
this one more clearly. He could have counted the iron bands of the
cuirass or the iron-studded leather strips falling down the thighs
above the kilt. He braced his lance in his hands and waited. The
Roman came in at a trot. His shaft struck out. Eodan parried it, wood
smote dully on wood. The horses snorted and circled while their riders
probed. The Roman's steel hit Eodan's shield, where it hung on the
Cimbrian's arm, and stuck there for a tiny moment. Eodan grabbed the
lance with his left hand and shoved his own weapon forward, clumsily,
with his right arm. The Roman's shield blocked him. Eodan whipped his
shaft down like a club, and it hit the Roman's knee. The man yelped and
dropped his shield. Eodan's iron went through his jaws. The Roman fell
backward, dragging the lance with him, strangling in blood. His horse
bucked, brought down a chance hoof and cracked the wood across.

Panting, Eodan drew his sword and looked about. He could dimly see
that men were skirmishing through dust and heat--the Bull help us,
but it was hot!--and that the battle was moving toward the Cimbrian
right. Sweat runneled from him, stung his eyes and drenched his padded
undergarment. He should have been crowing his victory. Two men slain
for certain; it was not often you knew what a blow of yours had done.
But he felt too choked in the dust.

He rode after the fight in search of an enemy. Boierik's plan had
worked, to draw the Roman horse away while the Cimbrian foot struck
their center. He could hear the screeches and hammering as men battled
on the ground; he could not see it.

Slowly his mount gained speed. He was riding at gallop when he saw the
knot of men. Two Romans ahorse were circling about four dismounted
Cimbri, who stood back to back and glared. Eodan felt the heart spring
in his breast. "_Hee-ya-hau! Hau, hau, hau!_" He whirled the great iron
blade up over his head and charged.

The nearest Roman saw him and had time to face the attack. Eodan struck
down, two-handed, guiding the stallion with his knees. The blow cried
out on the Roman shield, and he felt it shock back into his own bones.
He saw the shieldframe crumple. The Roman whitened and fell from the
saddle, rolled over and sat up holding a broken arm.

The other one darted to his rescue. Eodan took a savage spear-thrust on
his breastplate; it glanced down and furrowed his thigh. He reached
out, hammering with his sword. It bounced on helmet and shoulder
pieces, clamored against wood and steel. The lance broke across. The
Roman rider sat firm, working his way in, shield upraised. Eodan hewed
at his leg. The Roman caught the blow on his own sword, but the sheer
force of it pushed both blades down. Eodan struck with the edge of his
small shield and hit the Roman on the shoulder, knocking him from his
saddle. The four dismounted Cimbri roared and rushed in.

A wolf-fight snarled by. Eodan followed it. All at once he found
himself out of the dust cloud. The ground was torn underfoot, and a
dead barbarian glared empty-eyed at a cloudless sky. Not many miles
off gleamed Vercellae's white-washed walls. He could almost see how
the townsfolk blackened them, standing and staring. If Marius fell,
Vercellae would burn. High over all, floating like a dream, remote and
lovely, were the snowpeaks of the Alps.

Eodan gasped air into lungs like dry fire. He grew aware that his leg
bled ... and when had he been wounded in the hand? No matter. But he
would sell his best ox for a cup of water!

His eyes went back to the battle. The cavalry skirmished in blindness.
The Cimbrian foot raged against Catulus' legions, and Catulus buckled.
Where was Marius?

Even as he watched, Eodan saw Roman standards in the dust, a gleam, a
rippling steely line, and the army of Marius came from chaos and fell
upon the Cimbri!

Eodan jogged back, scowling. It was not well. He could see how the
barbarians were suddenly caught and chopped--and they had the sun in
their eyes, and never had men fought in so much heat.... What had
become of Boierik?

He entered the dust again. His tongue felt like a block of wood.
Presently he found some of his young riders streaming back to the
main fight. Their cloaks were tattered and their helmets stripped of
feathers; one man's cheek gaped open, and his teeth grinned through.

"_Hau-hau-hau!_" Eodan gave the war-cry, because someone must, and
hurled himself at the Roman lines. There was a whirling and a shock,
and then the earth came up and struck him. His horse galloped off, a
javelin in its flank.

Eodan cursed, rose to his feet and ran to the Cimbrian foot. Behind the
chained first rank he saw men who were stabbing with spears, hewing
with axes and swords, throwing stones and shooting arrows. They leaped
into the air, howled, shook their tawny manes and rushed to do battle.
The Romans stood firm, shield by shield, and worked.

Eodan reached the front-line flank of the Cimbrian host. He faced a
dimly-seen foe; the sun in his brows blinded him almost as much as the
dust and sweat. He heard a whistling, like the wind before rain, and
felt three thumps in his shield. The Romans had launched their massed
javelins.

Cimbri clawed at whetted iron in their flesh. Eodan was unhurt, but his
shield was useless. What new trick was this? Only one metal pin left in
the javelin head--it was bent and held fast by its crooked point; he
could not wrench it free. He knew a chill. This Marius had thought of
such a trick!

Casting his shield from him, Eodan joined the charge.

Elsewhere the invaders were already locked face to face with the enemy;
now this part of their host met him. Eodan struck at a shield. His
sword was blunted; it would not bite. A Roman blade flashed at him. He
dodged it, planted his feet wide and hewed two-handed. A Roman helmet
stopped his swing. He heard neckbones snap across. The man crashed to
the ground. One behind him stepped into line. The legion advanced.

Gasping, Eodan retreated. It was a hailstorm of blows now--shouts,
shocks, no more war-cries for lack of breath, but always the din of
weapons. And the rising wildcat song of the pipes ... where were the
lurs? No one blew the holy lurs? He yelled and struck out.

Backward step by step. His boot crushed something, the bones of a face.
He looked down and saw it was Ingwar, with a Roman javelin in his
armpit. He looked up again from the dead eyes, sobbed and hit through
redness at a face above a shield. The Roman had a long thin nose like a
beak. And he grinned. He grinned at Eodan.

Crash and clang and boom of iron. No more voices, except when a man
hooted his pain. Eodan saw one of the linked Cimbri fall, holding his
belly, trying to keep in his bowels. He died. His comrades dragged him
backward. The man beside the corpse gasped--a slingstone had smashed
his teeth--and sat down. A Roman took him by the hair and slashed off
his head. Four Romans, close together, stepped into the gap and cut
loose.

The battle banged and thundered under a white-hot sky. Italy's earth
rose up in anger and stopped the nostrils of the Cimbri.

Eodan slipped and fell in a pool of blood. He looked stupidly at his
hands, empty hands--where had his sword gone? Pain jagged through his
skull. He looked up; the Roman line was upon him. He glimpsed the hairy
knees of a man, drew his dagger and thrust weakly upward. A shield
edge came down hard on his wrist. He cried out and lost the knife. The
shield struck his helmet and darkness clapped down. The legionaries
walked over him.

He sat up again, looking at their backs. For a little while he could
not move. He could only watch them as they broke his people. There was
a tuba being sounded. Was it in his head, or did it blow victory for
Marius? His wrist was numb. Blood dripped slowly from a forearm gashed
across.

At least he lived, he thought. The dead around him were thick. Never
had he seen so many dead. And the wounded groaned until he sickened of
their anguish. He sat there for a while longer. The field grew black
with flies. The sun got low, a huge blood-colored shield seen through
dust.

The Romans took the field, gathered themselves together and
quick-marched after the fleeing.

Eodan struggled for wakefulness. He kept slipping back into night; it
was like trying to climb out of a watery pit. There was something he
must remember.... Was it his father? No, surely Boierik was dead; he
would not outlive this day. He would fall on his own double-headed
spear if he must. His mother had died two years ago, now let her ghost
thank the earth Powers for that. And Hwicca--

It came to him. He reeled to his feet. "Hwicca," he croaked. "Othrik."

The Romans would take the wagon camp. They would take the camp. The
Cimbri would be slaves.

Eodan lurched through nightmare across the Raudian plain. The hurt
wailed at him. The gathering crows flew up as he passed and then
settled down again. A riderless horse rushed past; he groped for its
reins, but it was many yards away. The horizon seemed to shrink until
it lay about him like bonds; then it stretched until he was the only
thing that was; he heard the fever-hum of the world's brain under his
feet.

When he neared the camp, miles beyond the battle, he had to rest for a
while. His legs would carry him no more. He had some thought that there
would be horses about; he and Hwicca and Othrik could get away. Oh,
the wide cool Jutland moors! He remembered how the first snow fell in
winter.

He saw the beaten Cimbri, such as lived, pouring into the camp. He got
up again and stumbled among them. The Romans were already over the
earthworks, briskly, like men who round up cattle.

Eodan went among them somehow. He saw the Cimbrian women stand in black
clothes on their wagons, spears and swords in hand, screaming. They
struck at their husbands and fathers and sons and brothers--"Coward!
Whelp! You fled, you fled--" They strangled their own children, threw
them under the wheels or the feet of the milling kine. Eodan passed a
woman he knew who had hanged herself from the pole of a wagon, and her
children were tied dangling at her heels.

Men who had thrown away their weapons, and saw the Romans gather in
their folk, took what rope they could find. There were no trees here;
they must tie themselves to the horns of the oxen, or by the neck to a
steer's legs, to die.

The Romans worked hard, prodding prisoners into groups, stunning,
binding. They took some sixty thousand alive.

Eodan paid small heed. It was happening elsewhere. He was a pair of
feet and a pair of eyes, searching for Hwicca ... no more.

He found her at last. She stood beside the wagon that had been her
household. She held Othrik to her breast and a knife in her hand. Eodan
slipped, fell, picked himself up, fell again, crawled on hands and
knees toward her. She did not see him. Her eyes were too wild. He had
no voice left to call.

"Othrik," said Hwicca. Her words wavered. He could barely hear them
above the noise. "Good Othrik." The hand with the dagger stroked across
his fine pale-gold hair as he slept in the curve of her arm. "Be not
afraid, Othrik," she said. "It is well. All is well."

A Roman squad came from beyond the god-cars. "There's a beauty!" Eodan
heard one of them shout. "Get her!"

Hwicca sucked in a gasp. She laid the knife at her son's throat. The
blade fell out of her fingers. Two of the Romans ran toward her. She
looked at them at they neared. She picked up the baby by his ankles and
dashed his head against the wagon boards.

"Othrik," she said numbly, and let the thing drop to earth.

The Romans--they were both young, hardly more than boys--stopped and
gaped. One of them took a backward step. Hwicca went down on her knees
and fumbled blindly after the dagger. "I am coming, I am coming," she
called. "Wait for me, Othrik. You are too little to go down hellroad
alone. I will come hold your hand."

The Roman squad was kicking some of Eodan's thralls toward the main
slave group. Their officer looked over his shoulder at the two boys
he had sent after Hwicca. "Snatch her up or she'll kill herself!" he
barked. "You can't peddle dead meat!"

They broke into a run again. Hwicca's hand touched the dagger.

Flavius the slave sprang from behind the baggage cart. He put his foot
on the knife. Hwicca stared like a clubbed animal up into his face. He
smiled. "No," he said.

Eodan hitched himself forward another yard. She had not seen him, even
yet. The two legionaries reached her, pulled her erect and hustled her
off. Flavius went after them. Presently another Roman detachment came
by and found Eodan.




III


Early the next year, only a few days after the feast of Mars had
signaled the vernal equinox, they brought an injured slave to the
master's house. This was on a Samnian latifundium owned by Gnaeus
Valerius Flavius.

It was a raw day--low smoky clouds scudded over the fields, with a
cold whistle of wind and a few rain-spatters. The rolling land lay wet
and dark, its trees nearly bare save for a clump of pines. A rutted
road gleamed with wind-ruffled puddles, and a few cows and goats, still
winter-shaggy, huddled behind the sheds. The field slaves stamped their
feet, blew on chafed hands and bent to their task; no idleness now,
this was plowing and sowing time, that the flax might clothe Rome next
winter. Their overseers rode up and down the lines, touching a back
here and there with a skilled lash, but lightly; today the air did all
the needful whipping for them.

Phryne came out of the house and felt how the wind bit. Her stola
skirts streamed from her girdle, and she almost lost the blue palla
before she got it on. Nevertheless, she could not have stayed another
hour in the villa. Mistress Cordelia would have it hot as Ethiopia, and
drown the brazier fumes in enough incense to throttle a mule!

As she walked over the sere lawn, smiling to old gardener Mopsus
but hurrying on (he was a dear, and so lonely since the master sold
his last grandchild--and a Greek--but _how_ he talked), she saw two
field hands approach. They were common dark men, some or other kind
of barbarian, she didn't know what. But the one they supported was
something else. She had not seen so big a man in a long time, and his
unkempt yellow hair and beard tossed a blaze across the sunless sky.

Why ... he must be a Cimbrian ... one of the very people who had
captured Master Flavius in Gaul! It was a Euripidean situation. Phryne
went down the hill for a closer look. One of the dark men saw her and
bobbed his head with coarse deference--a household slave, personal
attendant to the mistress herself, was not common folks.

"What is the matter?" asked Phryne. "What happened?"

The Cimbrian lifted his head. He bore a strongly molded face, heavy
about the jaw and brows but almost Hellenic of nose. His eyes were wide
apart beneath a tattooed triskele (how had the yelping barbarians of
Thule ever come on that most ancient symbol?) and a green color like
winter seas. He was white about the lips. His left leg dragged.

"He got hurt by a bull," said the first of the dark slaves. "The big
white stud bull broke out of the pen and come ramping down in the
field. Gored one man."

"They didn't dare kill him," added the other. "He's worth too much, you
see. And we couldn't lay a rope on him. Then this fellow got in, took
him by the horns, threw him and held him down till help come."

Phryne felt how the blood flew into her face. "But that was wonderful!"
she cried. "Another Theseus! And only hurt in the leg!"

The Cimbrian laughed, a short inhuman bark, and said: "I would not
have been hurt at all--we used to throw bulls every year at the spring
rites--but when those trained pigs of cowherds let him up they held the
ropes too slack." His Latin was rough and ungrammatical, but it flowed
quickly.

"Foreman says get him to the barracks and fix the bone," said one of
those who upbore him. "Best we go."

Phryne stamped her foot. At once she realized that she had driven her
small shoe into the mud. She saw the Cimbrian's eyes slide down, and a
grin went like a ghost over his mouth. He looked back at her and nodded
wryly. He knew.

She blurted in confusion: "Certainly not! I know what you would do,
have that fool of a blacksmith splint it--and he will limp for the rest
of his life. Up to the villa!"

They followed her, bashfully. No, not the Cimbrian--he jumped
one-footed--but, when they entered the kitchen and put him in a chair,
he sprawled as if he owned it. He was caked with mud, he had on only a
sleazy gray tunic, there were shackle scars on his wrists and ankles,
but he said, "Give me some wine," and the chief cook himself poured a
full stoup. The Cimbrian emptied it in three long gulps, sighed, and
held it out again.

Phryne went off after the house physician. He was Greek like herself,
all the most valuable slaves were Greek, even as the only valuable
free folk had once been--an aging man, with a knowledge of herbs and
poultices to ease Cordelia, who suffered loudly and would not be
without him. He came readily enough, looked at the wound, called for
water and began sponging it.

"A clean break," he said. "The muscle was little torn. Stay on a crutch
for a few weeks and it should heal as good as new. But first we'll
hear some of those famous Cimbrian howls, for I must set it."

"Do you take me for a Southlander?" snorted the hurt man. "I am a son
of Boierik."

"There are philosophers in _my_ family," said the physician, with an
edge in his voice. "Very well, then."

Phryne could not look at the leg, nor could she look away from the
barbarian's face. It was a good face, she thought, it would be handsome
in a wild fashion if some god would smooth off the slave-gauntness. She
saw how sweat spurted out on the skin, when his bones grated, and how
he bit his lip till the blood trickled.

The physician splinted and bound the leg. "I will see about a crutch,"
he said. "It might also be well to speak to the major-domo, or the
mistress. Otherwise, if I know the chief field overseer, they'll put
this man back at work before he is properly healed."

Phryne nodded. "You may go," she said to the gaping sowers. The cook
bustled off on some errand. Phryne found herself alone with the
barbarian.

"Rest a while," she said. She noticed his cup was empty for the second
time; she risked the steward's wrath and poured him a third.

"Thank you." He nodded curtly.

"It was heroic of you," she said, more clumsy with words than she was
wont.

He spat an obscenity. "The bull was something to fight."

"I see." She found a chair and sat down, elbows on knees, looking at
her folded hands.

"What is your name?" he asked.

"Phryne." Though it meant nothing to him, she was obscurely grateful
to hear no sniggering reference to her historic namesake's profession;
why did they never remember that the first Phryne had modeled for
Praxiteles, and forget what else she had been?

"I am Eodan, Boierik's son. Are you a Roman?"

She started, met a smoldering in his eyes and laughed a little. "Zeus,
no! I am a Greek. A slave like yourself."

"A well-tended slave," he fleered. He was drunk--not much, but enough
to loosen the wariness learned in the dealers' pens. "A darling of the
house."

Anger leaped in her--it stung that he should snap when she had offered
only help--and she said, "Are you so brave to make war on me with your
tongue?"

He checked himself. As he sat rubbing his shaggy chin, she could almost
see him turning the thought over in his mind. Finally, pushed out with
an effort that roughened it: "You are right. I spoke badly."

"It is nothing," she said, altogether melted. "I think I understand.
You were a free man. A king, did you say?"

"We have ... we had no kings," he mumbled. "Not as you seem to mean the
word here--what little I've heard. But truly I was a free man once."

A gust of rain went over the tiled roof. The hearthfire leaped and
sputtered; smoke caught Phryne's eyes, and she coughed and threw back
her cloak. Eodan's gaze fixed on her.

She knew that look. Every woman in the Roman world knew it, though the
high-born paid it no heed. A slave girl must. It was the look of a
man locked away from all women for months and years, lucky to have a
rare hurried moment in a strawstack at festival time. The penalty for
attacking expensive female property could be death, if her owner cared
(Phryne doubted Cordelia would) ... still, a desperate hand might seize
her one night. She stayed close to the villa when she was here.

She said quickly, "I have heard Master Flavius telling he was a
prisoner among your folk for four years."

Eodan laughed, deep laughter from full lungs, but somehow grim. At last
he answered, "Flavius was my slave."

"Oh--". A hand stole to her lips.

Still he looked at her. She was not tall, but she was lithely formed.
The simple white dress fell about long slim legs, touched the curve of
thigh and waist, drew over small firm breasts. Her hair was of deep
bluish-black, piled on a slender neck and caught with a bone fillet.
Her face did not have classic lines; perhaps that, and her quietness
when Roman men were about, was why she remained a virgin at twenty. But
more than one lovesick slave had tried to praise deep violet eyes,
smoky-lashed under arching brows, a wide clear forehead, tilted nose
and delicate chin, soft mouth and pale cheeks.

Eodan lifted his cup. "Be not afraid," he said. "I cannot leave this
chair before they bring me a staff."

Phryne received his bluntness with relief. Some of the educated
household men simpered about so she could vomit. She could give no
better reason, in all honesty, for not taking a lover or even a
husband. Cordelia had not forbidden her, and the memory of a certain
boy was chilly comfort.

"I should think," she whispered, leaning close lest it be overheard,
"that if you treated Flavius kindly--and he did not look much abused
when he came back--he could have found something better for you than
field labor. That destroys--" She stopped, appalled.

Eodan said bleakly, "Destroys men. Of course. Do you think I have not
seen what a few years of it do to a man? He could have done worse, I
suppose--resold me to the games I hear tell of, or as a rower on a
ship. But he could never trust me running about a house, even another
man's house, as freely as you do."

"Why not? You can have no more dreams of escape. You have seen
crucified men along the roads."

"Some things might be worth a crucifixion," said Eodan. He made no
great point of it; his tone was almost matter-of-fact, wherefore Phryne
shuddered.

"Hercules help me, why?" she breathed.

Eodan said from a white face, "He took my wife."

He drained his cup.

Phryne sat very still for a while. The wind mourned about the house,
wailed in the portico and rubbed leafless branches together. Another
rain-burst pelted the roof.

"Well!" said Eodan at last, "Enough of that, little Greek. I should
not have said anything, but for the wine, eh, and this leg feels as if
there were wolves at it." The arrogance slipped from him and she looked
into eyes hurt and helpless, which begged her to leave him his last
rags of pride. "You will not speak of what I said?"

"I swear so," she answered.

He regarded her for a very long while. Finally he nodded. "I think I
can believe that," he said.

Steps sounded on the brick floor. Phryne stood up, folding her hands
before her and casting duly meek eyes downward. Eodan remained as he
was, his gaze challenging those who entered. They were the major-domo
and Mistress Cordelia.

The major-domo, an Illyrian grown fat and bald in his own
self-importance till he could imagine nothing more than accounts and
ordering other slaves about, said: "Here the Cimbrian is, I am told, my
mistress. I shall call porters and have him carried back down to his
barracks."

Cordelia said: "Wait. I told you I would like to speak with this bull
wrestler."

Phryne raised her eyes, suddenly afraid for Eodan. He was so proud,
too much so for his own good. Slaves whom the dealer failed to break
inwardly, so that they let him chain their spirits as well as their
hands, might sometimes rise high and even regain freedom; but they were
more likely to end on a cross or in the arena. And Eodan was drunk
and--O sea-born Cyprian--he was looking at his owner's wife as he had
looked at her!

"You are a bold man," said Cordelia.

Eodan nodded.

She laughed. "And not overburdened with modesty," she went on. "Do not
tell me we have another of these barbarian kings!"

Eodan replied: "If you are Flavius' wife, then we have your husband's
one-time owner."

Phryne's heart seemed to crash to a halt. She stood for a brief space
feeling blood drain from her. Now the gods would have their revenge,
when a man bore his head so high.

Cordelia stepped back. For a moment she flushed.

She was a tall woman of Etruscan stock, perhaps descended from Tarquin
himself and some jewel of Tarquin's harem. Thirty years old, she had
the fullness of body that would turn to fat in another decade but was
as yet only superb. A silken dress violated every sumptuary law the
Republic had ever passed to emphasize hip and bosom, insolently. Her
hair was thick, its black copper-tinged, her face curve-nosed and
heavy-lipped, her eyes like southern nights. She had the taste to wear
only one ornament, a massive silver bracelet.

The major-domo turned red and gobbled his indignation. Cordelia glanced
at him, back at Eodan, then suddenly she laughed aloud.

"So this is what he looks like! And my husband, who has wearied Roman
dinners this half a year with his stories of the Cimbri, did not bring
you to show off!"

She paused, looked closely into Eodan's face--their eyes met like
swords--and murmured, "But I see why."

Phryne leaned against the wall; she did not think her knees would hold
her unaided. Now they were on a well-marked path; she knew what came
next. The final fate of Eodan was hidden--it could be gay or gruesome,
but this part of the way was mapped.

Young Perseus had entered the Gorgon's lair and come back alive.

She wondered why she felt like weeping.




IV


"He has deserved well of us," Cordelia said. "Let him be kept in the
household, at least till he is properly healed. Give him good raiment
and light work. And first of all a bath!"

Thereafter she did not hurry matters. Eodan limped about with a
crutch, ate and drank and slept enormously, scoured pots or helped old
Mopsus the gardener. He spent much time down at the stables, where
he soon had the friendship of the head groom, a dour Cappadocian who
was believed to have been hatched rather than born since not even a
mother could have loved him. Phryne did not understand how a man of
intelligence--and Eodan had a good mind in his rough way--could sit
hour after hour talking about currycombs and fetlocks and spavins and
whatever else there was; but so it went and, after all, divine Homer
dwelt lovingly on horses.

Washed, shaved, his hair cut and combed, a white tunic and sandals on
him, Eodan might almost have been a Homeric warrior himself--Diomedes,
perhaps, or Ajax the haughty. As he grew rested and fleshed out, his
manners became milder, he snarled or cuffed at men less often, his
smiles were sometimes nearly warm instead of a mere wolfish baring of
teeth. But he dropped his green eyes for no one, and the house slaves
who shared their room with him were kept at a frosty distance.

The major-domo was afraid of him. "I would not trust that barbarian,
not one inch," he told Phryne. "My dear, you should have seen his back
when he first bathed. I would not even try to count all the whip scars.
And many slashes were new--he got them here, in the months we have had
him, the last of them perhaps only yesterday! Mark my words, it is the
sign of an unruly heart. It is such men who lead slave revolts. If he
were mine, I would geld him and sell him to the lead mines."

"Some men were born gelded," said Phryne coldly, and left. She
could almost see the crisscrossing of thin white lines on Eodan's
shoulderblades. She avoided him for a while, uncertain why she did so.

And the springtime waxed. Each day the sun stood higher; each day a new
bird-song sounded in the orchard. One morning fields and trees showed
the finest transparent green, as if the goddess had only breathed
on them in the night. And then at once, unable to wait, the leaves
themselves burst out and the orchard exploded in pale fire.

It happened Cordelia was complaining of a headache again; she must lie
in a dark room and make everyone creep by. Phryne, who considered her
mistress as strong as a cow, found an excuse to leave the villa. She
would gather apple blossoms and arrange them for Cordelia's delight.

The morning was still wet, after a short rain. Where the sun struck
the grass, it flashed white. A thrush sat on a bough and chanted of
all bright hopes; a milk cow grazed in a meadow, impossibly red. When
Phryne went among the gnarled little trees, they shook down raindrops
upon her. She took a low branch in her arms and buried her face in its
flowers.

"Poor blooms," she whispered. "My poor babies. It is wrong to take away
your springtime."

The knife bit at the twigs; she filled her arms with apple blossoms.

Eodan came from the villa. He crutched along as readily as a
three-legged dog, bound for the stables carrying a mended bridle. The
endlessly gossiping slaves had told Phryne the barbarian was clever
with his hands.

But when he saw her he halted. He had never thought much about
beauty--land, workmanship, live flesh was good or bad, no more. Now,
briefly, the sight of a girl's dark head and slim waist, with dew and
white radiance between, went through him like a spear.

The moment passed by. He thought only as he swung about toward her
that--by the Bull!--it was a new year and she was a handsome wench.
"_Ave_," he called.

"_Atque vale_," said Phryne, smiling at him. His hair needed cutting
again, and it was uncombed, tangled with sunlight.

"Hail and farewell? Oh, now, wait!" Eodan reached her and barred the
path. "You have no haste. Come talk to me."

"My task here is finished," she said in a quick, unsure voice.

"Must they know that?" Eodan's coldest laugh snapped out. "I've learned
how to stretch an hour's task into a day. You, having been a slave
longer, must be even more skilled at it."

The fair planes of her cheeks turned red. She answered, "At least I
have learned not to insult those who do me no harm."

"I am sorry," he said, contrite. "My people were not mannered. Is that
why you have kept yourself from me?"

"I have not," she said, looking away. "It--it only happened ... I was
busy--"

"Well, now you are not busy," he said. "Can we be friends?"

The gathered blossoms shivered on her breast. Finally she looked up and
said, "Of course. But I really cannot stay here long. The mistress has
one of her bad days."

"Hm. They say in the kitchen that's only from idleness and overeating.
They say her husband sent her down here because her behavior made too
much of a scandal even for Rome."

"Well--well, it was a--a rest cure...."

Ha, thought Eodan, I would like to help Mistress Cordelia rest her
tired nerves! The story went that Flavius needed her family's help
too much in his political striving to divorce her. And, if ever a man
deserved the cuckoo sign, it was Flavius!

Eodan clamped on that thought and tried to snuff it out. He could taste
its bitterness in his throat.

He said: "You have a Cimbrian habit, Phryne, which I myself was losing.
You do not speak evil of folk behind their backs. But tell me, how long
have you been here?"

"Not long. We came down perhaps a week before your accident." Phryne
looked past a stile, over the meadow to the blue Samnian hills. Tall
white clouds walked on a lazy wind. "I only wish we could stay forever,
but I'm afraid we will go back to the city in a few months. We always
do."

"How do you stand with the mistress?" asked Eodan. He hitched himself a
little closer to the girl. "Just what is your position?"

"Oh--I have been her personal attendant for a couple of years. Not a
body servant; she has enough maids."

Eodan nodded. His thoughts about Cordelia's younger maids were
lickerish, and their eyes had not barred him. But so far there had been
no chance. He listened to Phryne:

"I am her amanuensis. I keep her records and accounts, write her
letters for her, read and sing to her when she wants such diversion. It
is not a hard life. She is not cruel. Some matrons--" The girl shivered.

"You are from Greece?"

She nodded. "Plataea. My grandfather lost his freedom in the war of--No
matter, it would mean nothing to you." She smiled. "How tiny our
vaunted world of Greeks and Romans is, after all!"

"So you were born a slave?" he went on.

"In a good household. I was educated with care, to be a nurse for their
children. But they fell on evil times two years ago and had to sell me.
The dealer took me to Rome, and Mistress Cordelia bought me."

He felt a dull anger. He said, "You wear your bonds lightly."

"What would you have me do?" she replied with a flash of indignation.
"I should give thanks to Artemis for a situation no worse than this--my
books, at least, and a measure of respect, and an entire life's
security. Do you know what commonly happens to worn-out slaves? But my
mind will not wear out!"

"Well, well," he said, taken aback. "It is different for you." And
then wrath broke loose, and he lifted his fist against heaven. "But I
am a Cimbrian!" he shouted.

"And I am a Greek," she said, still cold to him. "Your people did not
have to come under the Roman yoke. You could have stayed in the North."

"Hunger drove us out. We were too many, when the bad years came. Would
you have us peaceably starve? We did not even want war with Rome, at
first. We asked for land within their domains. We would have fought
for them, any enemies they wished. We sent an embassy to their Senate.
And they laughed at us!" Eodan dropped the bridle, leaned against his
crutch and held out shaking claw-curved fingers. "I would tear down
Rome, stone by stone, and flay every Roman and leave their bones for
ravens to pick!"

She asked in a steel-cool tone: "Then why do you think it evil of them
to do likewise to you, since the gods granted them victory?"

He felt the tide of his fury ebb. But it still moved in him; and the
ocean from which it had come would always be there. He said thickly,
"Oh, I do not hate them for that. I hate them for what came afterward.
Not clean death, but marching in a triumph, shown like an animal, while
the street-bred rabble jeered and pelted us with filth! Chained in a
pen, day upon day upon day, lashed and kicked, till we finally went up
on a block to be auctioned! And afterward shoveling muck, hoeing clods,
sleeping in a hogpen barracks with chains on, every night! That is what
I have to revenge!"

He saw how she shrank away. It came to him then that he had his own
purposes for her. He forced a stiff smile. "Forgive me. I know I am
uncouth."

She said with a break in her voice, "Were you put on the block? Did it
only happen that Flavius bought you?"

"Actually, I was not," he admitted. "He had inquiry made for me, and
bought me directly. He saw me and said with that smile of his that he
wanted to be sure of my fate, so he could pay me back the right amount
of both good and evil. Then I was walked down here with some other new
laborers."

"And your--" She stopped. "I must go now, Eodan."

"My wife?" He heard his heart knocking, far away in a great
hollowness. "He told me that he had Hwicca, too--in Rome ..."

His hands leaped out. He seized her by both arms so she cried out. The
apple blossoms fell from her grasp, and his foot crushed them.

"_Hau!_" he roared. "By the Bull, only now do I think of it! You attend
the mistress? And she still shares her husband's town house? Then you
have seen Flavius in Rome this winter! You have seen _her_!"

"Let me go!" she shrieked.

He shook her so her teeth rattled. "How is she? You must have seen her,
a tall fair girl, her name is Hwicca. What has become of her?"

Phryne set her jaws against the pain. "If you let me go, barbarian, I
will tell you," she said.

His hands dropped. He saw finger marks cruelly deep on her white skin.
She touched the bruises with fingers that trembled while tears ran
silent down her face. She caught her lip in her teeth to hold it steady.

"I am sorry," he mumbled. "But she is my wife."

Phryne leaned against the tree. At last she looked up, still hugging
herself. The violet eyes were blurred. She whispered, "It is I who must
ask pardon. I did not realize it was the same--I did not know."

"How could you have known? But tell me!" He held out his empty hands
like a beggar.

"Uicca ... I saw her once in a while. The Cimbrian girl, they all
called her. She seems well thought of by Flavius. He keeps her in a
room of her own, with her own servants. He is--often there. But no one
else sees her much. We never spoke. She was always very quiet. Her
servants told me she was gentle to them."

"Flavius--" Eodan covered his eyes against the unpitying day.

Phryne laid a hand on his shoulder. It shuddered beneath her palm. "The
Unknown God help you," she said.

He turned around and looked upon her, then reached out and gathered her
against him. He kissed her so her mouth was numb.

She writhed free, scraped down his ankle with a sandaled foot and
clawed with her nails until he let her go. She was white; her loosened
dark hair fell about her like a thunder-cloud.

"You slobbering pig!" she cried. "So that is all you miss of your wife!"

She spun about and ran.

"Wait!" he cried. "Wait, let me tell you--I only--"

She was gone. He stood upon the fallen blossoms and cursed. Hwicca
would have understood, he thought in wrath and desolation; Hwicca is a
woman, not a book-dusty prune, and knows what the needs of a man are.

He looked down, and up again, and finally north, toward Rome. Then he
picked up the bridle and went on to the stables. That day he contrived
to be given a task at the forge, shaping iron, and the courtyard rang
with his hammerblows until dark.

The days passed. The flax was sown. They paid less heed to the ancient
festivals now than formerly; once these acres had belonged to free men;
now it was all one plantation staffed with slaves. But some custom
still lived. The week of the Floralia was observed, not as immoderately
as in Rome, but with a degree of ease and a measure of wine.

On the day before the Floralia the physician examined Eodan's leg. "It
has knit," he grunted. "Give me back my crutch."

Eodan asked wearily, "Will they return me to the fields?"

"That is not my province." The physician left him.

Eodan walked slowly out of the villa into the walled flower garden
behind the kitchen. His leg felt almost a stranger to him. No matter,
he would be running in an hour. Running hence? They were _not_ going to
make a field hand of him again! It ground away, not only the body, but
mind and pride and hope, until a mere two-legged ox remained.

Phryne was talking with one of Cordelia's maids. She saw him and said,
"Enough. Come with me." The girl's eyes lingered on Eodan as she went
by. He swore at Phryne; in all the time since the orchard morning, she
would not speak to him--the winds take her! He considered how to get
the maid alone.

"There you are! And well at last! You've been loafing too long, you
lazy dog, and eating like a horse the while! Come here!"

Eodan strolled toward the major-domo. He rubbed his fist, looked at it
and back at the man's nose, nodded and said: "I did not hear you. Would
you repeat your wish?"

"There, there are some--heavy barrels to move," stammered the
major-domo. "If you will kindly come this way ..."

Eodan was willing enough to trundle the wine casks about. It was
a glory to feel his strength returned. And the villa was all in a
bustle--they were hanging up garlands everywhere, the girls giggled and
the men laughed, o ho ho, tonight! Eodan drew a pretty wench, a maid,
into a corner, they scuffled a little, she whispered breathlessly that
she would meet him in the olive grove after moonrise or as soon as she
could get away....

The Roman correctness of household eased. Men helped themselves openly
to wine, laughed with their overseers, drew buckets of water to pour
over sweaty skin, combed the fleas from their hair and wove garlands.
Eodan, rolling a great cheese from the storehouse, chanted a Cimbrian
march for his friend the groom.

    "_High stood our helmets,
    host-men gathered,
    bows were blowing
    bale-wind of arrows--_"

But no one understood the words.

At sundown the lamps were lit with those sulfur-tipped sticks Eodan
still thought a rash risk of Fire's anger. The villa glowed with a
hundred small suns of its own. He stood in the garden with Mopsus. "I
must go in now and help feed my fellows," he said.

"So, so. A good feed tonight. A good feed. My granddaughter used to
live for Floralia night--or was it my daughter, she was a baby too,
once ... I wonder, though, why Mistress hasn't asked any high-born
guests. It isn't like Mistress not to have fun when she can."

Eodan shrugged. He had seen Cordelia often enough, seated on a couch
or borne in a litter, but his world had been far from here, even in
the house; she rarely entered the kitchen or the stables. She was only
a task his little maidservant must finish before joining him under the
olive trees.

He went back into the villa. At its rear were the rooms where the
household's male property ate and slept. As he passed out of the
kitchen toward those chambers, he saw Phryne.

The lamp that she held turned her pale skin to gold. He moved forward,
smiling, a little tipsy, meaning only to explain himself to her. She
lifted her hand. "Stop."

"I'm not about to touch you," he flared.

"Good!" Her mouth twisted upward. He had seldom heard so whetted a
voice. "I was sent to fetch you. Come."

She turned about and walked quickly toward the atrium. He followed.
"But Phryne, what is this?"

Her fist clenched. "You do not know?"

He halted and said harshly, "If I am about to be sent back to the
barracks--"

She looked over her shoulder. Tears stood in her eyes. "Oh, not that,"
she said. "Be not afraid of that. Be glad! You are about to be honored
and pleasured."

"What?"

"In fact, the highest honor and the noblest pleasure of which _you_ are
capable." She stamped her foot, caught her breath and strode on. He
followed in bewilderment.

They crossed an open peristyle, where the first stars mirrored
themselves shakenly in a mosaic pool. Beyond was a door inlaid with
ivory, Venus twining arms about beautiful Adonis. A Nubian with a sword
stood on guard. Eodan had seen him about--a huge man, cat-footed, but
betrayed by his smooth cheeks and high voice.

Phryne knocked on the door. "Go in," she said. "Go on in."

Someone giggled, down in the flickering darkness of the corridor. Eodan
pushed his way through, and the door swung shut behind him.

He stood in a long room, marble-floored, richly strewn with rugs and
with expensive furnishings. Many lamps hung from the ceiling, till
the air seemed as full of soft light as of incense. The window was
trellised with climbing roses.

A table bore wine and carefully prepared food for two. But there was
only one broad couch beside it.

Cordelia was stretched out on the couch. Light rippled along her gown.
It was of the sheerest silk; her flesh seemed to glow through. She sat
up, smiling, so that her copious breasts were thrust at him. "Hail,
Cimbrian," she said.

Eodan gaped. The blood roared in his temples.

She stood up, took a big two-handled silver cup and walked across to
him. Her gait was a challenge. When she stood before him he could look
down the loose open front of her dress. "Will you not drink with me?"
she asked.

"Yes," he said, in his own tongue, for Latin had no such simple way of
agreeing. He took the goblet and hoisted it in hands that shook. He was
no judge of wine, nor would he have cared tonight, but he noticed dimly
that this was smooth and strong.

"I have watched you go about," said Cordelia. "I wanted to thank you
for your--services--but it seemed best to let your wound heal first.
And then today I saw you lift a cask I would have set two men to carry.
I am very glad of that."

He handed her back the cup, still mute. "All of it?" she laughed. "But
I wanted to share it with you. As a pledge of friendship. Now we must
pour another."

Her thigh brushed his as she turned. He gulped for air. "Come," she
said, took his hand and led him to the couch.

The flask gurgled as she poured from it. "My husband was wrong to set
a king to work in his fields," she went on. "For I will not believe
you were anything less than a king of your people. Perhaps we two can
reach a better understanding--for a while ..." She looked up at him,
slantwise. "It will depend on you, largely." She lifted the beaker
again. "To our tomorrows. May they be better than our yesterdays."

They drank in turn. She sat down and drew him beside her. "I have tried
and tried to pronounce that barbarous name of yours," she said. "I will
give you another. Hercules? Perhaps!"

Suddenly her mouth was hot upon his.

She stood up, breathing heavily. "I meant to eat first," she said,
quick slurred words through curling sweet smoke. "It would be
leisurely, civilized, with much fine play. But that would be wrong
with you, I see that now." She reached out her arms. "Take off your
tunic. Take off my gown. Let us keep the Floralia."

Much later, when the wine and the food were gone, the lamps burned out
and the first thin gray creeping into the eastern sky, she ruffled his
hair and smiled sleepily. "I will surely call you Hercules."




V


After festival time, the latifundium went back into harness. Up in the
villa there was the measured pace of days--housework, garden work,
much dawdling until some overseer went by, backbiting gossip, petty
intrigues for women and position, sometimes after dark a furtive
Asiatic ritual of magic or mystery. A womanish world. Eodan considered
himself well out of it.

But riding through the fields, where the sun and the whip blistered
a hundred naked backs and all a man's dreams finally narrowed to the
day's hoeing and the night's shackled sleep, Eodan wondered with a
chill how he had remained himself even for those few months he served.
Winter had helped--days on end where he sat idle with the others,
dozing, cracking fleas, once or twice knocking a tooth out of someone
who offered him loathsome consolations.... Nevertheless, he searched
himself as no Cimbrian had done before and knew that his servile time
had indeed touched him. He went more warily through life, slowly
learning how to guard his words. He would never again live wholly in
the moment's joy; he would always be thinking beyond--where would the
next attack come from, or how should he himself attack?

Even when Cordelia taught him some new pleasure--and she had given her
life to such arts--a part of him wondered how long this would endure.
For the rest, however, it had been a good month, or whatever time had
passed. He had the name of bodyguard, though only the surly Nubian was
allowed to bear weapons. He accompanied her on impulsive journeys about
the countryside, organized hunts in the forests for her to watch,
matched himself in athletic exhibitions with the brawnier slaves from
this and surrounding farms. A few times she even sent him on errands
of two or three days, as to a town to arrange for certain supplies.
He thought of using the chance to escape--but no, he knew too little
of Italy; they would snare him and tie him up to die. Wait a little
longer, make careful plans, or even win freedom for himself and Hwicca
within this Roman world. It was not impossible, given patience....
Meanwhile, aloneness with a blooded horse, among hazy hills and through
woods where only dryads and charcoal burners dwelt, was a gift to him,
almost like being free again.

Now he was coming back from such a trip. He rode at an easy mile-eating
pace, soothed by hoof-plop and saddle-squeak, the breeze in his face
amid the clean summery odor of his mount. He was richly clad; his
tunic, cloak, and boots were of simple cut and muted color, but he
liked the sensuous fabrics. His hair fluttered in the light wind,
and he sat straight as a lancer; and, when he saw the villa itself,
dark against a sky turning pink and gold with sunset, he was close to
letting out a Cimbrian whoop. After all--Cordelia! He checked the noise
and merely grinned instead, but he set the horse to a gallop, and they
came ringing and snorting into the rear courtyard.

"_Hoy-ah!_" Eodan jumped to the flagstones, tossed his reins at a
stableboy and strode quickly toward the garden gate. The shortest way
to the atrium was through the roses.

As he passed into their fragrance, he stopped. Phryne was alone between
the walls, gathering a few early blooms. A great cloud of hot bronze
lifted far, dizzyingly far above her head; the sky beyond it was taking
on the color of her eyes.

"Hail," he said.

She straightened herself. The plain white stola fell in severe folds,
but could not hide a deerlike grace. She had not Cordelia's opulence,
and she barely reached to his heart; yet it came to him that he had
never thought of her as boyish, nor as just a little bit of a thing.

Her face, all soft curves and a few pert, nearly rakish angles,
stiffened. She turned as if to go, but resolve came back; she continued
her work, ignoring him.

He did not know why, unless it was that his small journey had given
certain unseen chain-galls time to heal, but he went toward her and
said, "Phryne, if I have wronged you, how can I mend it unless you tell
me what I did?"

Her back was turned, her head bent. Under the softly piled black hair,
he saw that her nape was still almost childish. Somehow that filled him
with tenderness. She said, so low he could scarcely hear it, "You have
not harmed me."

"Then why have you circled so wide of me? You never answered when I
greeted you in passing. You have said me no word in weeks."

Her voice rose a little but shook: "Well, some women may be glad of
your pawing. I was not!"

Eodan felt himself flush, as deeply as the western sky. He responded
clumsily, "Why have you given me no chance to say what I meant? It was
wrong of me to--to kiss you. I ask your pardon. But I was driven; there
was a Power in that place--and did I hurt you so much?"

Then she looked up at him and said in a tone heavy with unshed tears:
"It was chiefly yourself you harmed."

Eodan looked away. For a moment he trod from her, up and down a
graveled path that mumbled beneath his feet. The bronze cloud cooled
toward newly blown roses. In the west, just above the crumbling
vine-covered wall, he could see a green streak, unutterably clear.
Somewhere a cow lowed; otherwise it was very quiet.

Eodan said at last, slowly, word by word, as he hammered it into shape
within himself: "I understand. But you do not understand me. They say
you are still a maiden. Well, you have called a curse on me for doing
something of which you have no knowledge."

Phryne's fingers clenched about a rose stalk. The thorns bit. She
stared at the bright blood drops, wiped them on her gown in a blind
fashion and said through unfirm lips: "Perhaps it is true. I thought
one thing of you. When you did something else, _that_ is how you hurt
me. But perhaps I have indeed not understood."

"I am not wont to speak of these matters," he told her, with effort.
"Among the Cimbri, it was not so--so twisted together. Wives did not
betray their husbands. Husbands--well--a man is otherwise than a
woman. He has other needs. I was driven by the Powers of earth; the
Bull was within me that day, Phryne. And more than that--Can you
understand how it felt to hear you tell what has--has become of my
wife, the mother of my son, whom she killed to keep him free? Can you
understand how I would turn for any--what is the word?--any comfort
that you could give--or anyone could--Do you see?" he pleaded, facing
her with his hands outspread.

She rubbed her eyes. "I see," she whispered.

He doubled up one fist and smote it softly into the other palm, again
and again. "It would help Hwicca not a bit if I let the Bull roar
within me so loud I could think of nothing else," he said. "Indeed it
was a new thought to me, this you bring forth--that what is between a
man and his wife, for good or ill, can in any way be changed by whether
he sleeps alone or not when she is gone."

"I am not so sure of that," she answered. "No man will say it is true
of her!" When she lifted her face, he saw it was streaked with silent
tears. "But I could be wrong. I do know little of these matters."

Eodan said, with a sad smile tugging up one corner of his mouth,
"Between the time I wed Hwicca and the time a year afterward, when we
came to the Raudian field, I touched no other woman. It was not that I
lacked the chance, but only that none seemed worth the time I could be
with her. Will you believe that?"

She nodded dumbly.

"Well, then." Eodan held out his hand, in the manner he had learned
from the Romans. "Shall we be friends?"

She caught it tightly. Sunset smoldered to dusk. He could see her as
little more than a paler shadow.

She said at last, in a tone gone remote from sorrow, "I would not
have you think, Eodan, that I ever condemned you because of some dead
philosopher's thoughts on chastity. It was that I believed your case
was like mine. I have been lonely too, now and then. But I see it was
a false hope. No man, no woman ever has the same destiny; we are all
pursued by our private Furies. Help me remember that, Eodan!"

He asked her, out of a newly reborn pain, "What happened, Phryne?"

"There was a boy in the household at Plataea," she said, still in the
small voice that spoke to itself, knowing him only as a shadow under
the evening star. "He was a slave too--not much older.... He walked
like the sun before me. We would have had each other somehow--oh, there
are families among slaves, even a slave can build a home. But then our
master's creditors closed in. Antinous went first. I saw him led off;
they said he would be shipped to Egypt.... Well," she finished wearily,
"that was three years ago. But sometimes at night I still wake up from
a dream where he kisses me."

Eodan's thought was jagged: His ghost will not let her look on another
man. And even if she did, would she wish to bear a son that might be
sold in Egypt?

He said aloud, "Phryne, have you heard that the Cimbri do not lie on an
oath?"

She stirred, as if awakening. "What do you want to say?"

"The oath-ring on which I was wedded must have been cast into bangles
for some Roman whore," he said bitterly. "However, I shall swear anyway
to lay no hand upon you, as a man does on a woman, unless you ask it
yourself. And I do not expect you will."

"Why--"

"I would like you to think you had one friend to trust," he blurted.
And he did not know why he had made such an offer, unless it was that
his memories of Hwicca had begun to shriek again.

"I will take your oath," she whispered.

Suddenly she fled. He heard her weeping in the dark. At such times most
folk would liefer be alone. He went on into the villa, heavily.

Cordelia was sitting in the atrium, lamplight glowing on her; she was a
roundedness of shadow and rich highlights. She was toying with a loom,
because it was fashionable still for Roman matrons to pretend they
were housewives. Outside, among the white pillars of the portico, a
boy-slave from Sicily was singing and playing an illegal lyre. His high
clear tones were so lovely it had been decided he should always keep
them.

She looked up. Her teeth flashed wet and white. "Hail, my Hercules!"

"Hail, Mistress," snapped Eodan, not able to smooth his words. He stood
with folded arms, looking down upon her.

"Well! You have a face like Jupiter's wrath, my friend." Cordelia
leaned back, regarding him through narrowed dark eyes. "Did you have
trouble on your journey?"

"No trouble, Mistress. Here is the money I did not spend." He slipped
the heavy purse from his belt and flung it on the table. The denarii
crashed so loudly that she started.

She rose, in one rippling motion, and the thin silk showed him how she
tautened. Her lips parted. A scream would bring the Nubian, the porter
and half a dozen watchdogs to bind him and do whatever she wished.
Eodan felt coldness along his backbone. He had to be more careful.

The knowledge that he, Boierik's son, must be careful of a woman tasted
like vomit.

"What is the matter with you?" she asked in anger.

"I beg your pardon, Mistress." Eodan went to one knee and bowed his
head stiffly. "I felt a little out of sorts."

Cordelia chuckled in her throat, left the chair and came to him. She
ran her hand through his tangled hair as he knelt. "And why were you so
at odds with the world ... Hercules?" she murmured.

He saw the answer. "I was parted from you," he got out. Then suddenly,
because he must do something in his shame, he grasped her about the
knees and pulled her to him. His face he buried in soft darkness.

"Oh," she gasped. "Oh--not here--wait--" But her hands were pressing
his head close. He forced her down to the floor. She laughed without
sound and tried to roll from him. He used his strength to pull her
back. The frail spidery silk ripped open in his fingers. "Beast!" she
said, her lips stretched wide, her eyes closed.

Outside, the boy faltered for an instant, then recollected his
orders and continued the song. It dealt with a legionary in far Asia
remembering his mother.

Afterward Cordelia led Eodan to her sleeping chamber. A maid brought
them wine and cakes. She drooped an eye at him, her mouth quivering
faintly upward, and he recalled that once she had agreed to meet him
after moonrise.

"Hercules," said Cordelia, not heeding the girl at all. She snuggled
herself against Eodan's side, as they lay on the bed, and nuzzled his
cheek. "You big crazy Hercules."

He did not feel the stallion's contentment she had given him before.
Tonight she had only left him hollow, in some fashion he did not
understand. He had never felt he was betraying anyone--until now. He
held his wine cup in slack fingers and asked, "Mistress, why will you
not try to speak my right name?"

"Because anyone might bear it," she said, "but there is only one son of
Alcmene."

He could not speak what he really felt, not if he wished to live. But
he could at least shake off all canine eagerness to please. He could
say bluntly, "Mistress, you have been kind to me, but it was my habit
once to give kindness. It hurts to receive it, and to make no gift in
return."

He wanted to roar out: I am no pet animal, no toy of yours, I am a
free man with my own name my father gave me. I am not ungrateful for
ease, and chains removed, and your body. But between us is merely a
shallowness. On your part, an amusing few weeks; on my part, a slave's
scrabbling for what he can get, a slave's sly revenge on his master,
and a slave's worry about what will become of him when you grow weary.
I will be no more a slave, I will go hence to my wife.

But he listened to her say, "Hercules, you have given me more than you
know."

Startled, he turned to face her. He had not seen her blush before now:
it rose up over breasts and throat and cheeks and brow like a tide.
Her nails bit his wrist, and she did not meet his eyes. He heard the
slurred, hurried tone:

"Have you ever wondered why I drink and take men and disgrace myself
as well as my husband? Did you think it was simple idleness and lust?
Well, it is in part; I will not say otherwise. But only in part.
Flavius forsook me long before I turned on him. He gave me a few weeks,
and they were sweet, but then he turned elsewhere. I was locked away
to be a proper Roman matron and bear his children. Do you think you
are the only slave in this room, Hercules? When I remained barren, he
hardly spoke to me. For nine years, before he went off to be captured
by you, he hardly said me a word. And yet it was him the gods had
cursed, not me. For hear! I turned in my need to a young lad who
visited our house now and again, a curly-headed boy who loved me, loved
me. And by him I was quickened! It could have been Flavius' son. He
could have set the child on his knee, no one had to know.... He had my
baby destroyed! I could have brought the law on him--perhaps my lover
might have helped--I do not know. Perhaps not. A father has so much
power. I did not try. It was better to come out of the woman's world,
begin to give my own banquets and have many men--many, many. I dared
have no more children, especially when he was away in captivity. I
possess an old slave woman, a witch from Thrace, who knows how to keep
the occasional accident from ever becoming noticeable. I thought it was
as well. I did not wish to carry on my own sickness in the world. Let
it die with me.

"Hercules--" Her head burrowed into the crook of his arm, she shivered
beneath his touch--"I found a kind of hope in you."

Eodan thought, Did earth's last happy folk leave their bones on the
Raudian plain?

Blindly, he drew Cordelia to him. Her hands were cold on his skin. But
the rest of her seemed ablaze.

And later, humbly, she said, "Thank you."

The night wore on. They did not sleep. But it was curious how much they
talked, and how dryly, almost like two consuls mapping a campaign, when
they were not kissing.

"This cannot be too open," she said. "Flavius can endure being
whispered about on my account, for the sake of my father's help. An
equestrian cannot rise far without some such figurehead. And a Roman
wife's affairs with Romans are common enough--but not with barbarians.
That would make him a laughingstock! And he would avenge his slain
political ambitions more than his honor." After a moment, thoughtfully:
"And even if his reputation were not harmed--I am unsure what he feels
toward you, who owned him--"

"I too," said Eodan, surprised. He had imagined Flavius was grateful
at first, after Arausio, and friendly later, and malicious after
Vercellae. Now it grew upon him that he had only seen chance waves
across a deep and secret pool. Flavius' soul was locked away from him.

"So we will keep you here, with the title of guardsman," decided
Cordelia. "He seldom comes to this estate. You can arrange to be
elsewhere if he should come. This may take a few months, you realize. I
must work on my father and others; I must make sure that when I finally
do divorce him, I will come at once under some other man's powerful
protection. And, of course, that you come with me." A slow, cruel smile
lifted her lips. "And that _I_ rule my next household. Some Senator,
doddering with age, and very rich.... Then you can be brought to Rome,
Hercules. There will be wealth for you.... many slaves are wealthy in
their own right--or you can even be freed, if you think a change of
title makes any difference." She melted against him. "It does not. You
already have me in freehold."

He embraced her again. As she trembled in his hands, he wondered how
much of her speaking was real and how much only the she-animal of this
night.

He waited until she had rested again, and drunk again, and returned to
him on the bronze bed. Then, as he lay tangled in her hair, he said--it
had taken less courage to charge the Roman army--"When can you get
release for my wife?"

She sprang from him, spitting like a cat. "Do you dare?" she yelled.

Eodan stood up, smiling by plan, and said, "I would not forget
any--friend--even her. Can she not be bought back, or released somehow?"

Cordelia paused. Her look grew narrow, as he had seen before. "Do you
think of this brood-mare as merely a friend?" she asked.

Eodan swallowed. He could not answer, only nod.

"Then forget her, as you will have to forget all the Cimbri," said
the woman in a cold voice. "I will not arouse Flavius' suspicions by
speaking of that mop-headed sow he has been wallowing with all winter.
Let him sell her to a brothel when he tires of her, as he has done with
so many others."

Through a shimmering and a humming, Eodan saw how she stood crouched,
ready to escape his violence and call for help. Neither of them
moved--until at last she walked by him, threw herself upon the bed and
beckoned him as she would a dog.

He came. There was nothing else possible, save to die.

Toward sunrise, Cordelia murmured drowsily, "I forgive you, Hercules.
We will forget what was said, because of what was done."

He made his lips touch hers.

"Now good night," she laughed. "Or is it good morning?"

He waited until she slept--by the colorless, heartless false dawn she
looked blowsy enough--then put on his tunic and stole from the room. He
felt the need of a bath and, yes, he would borrow a horse and gallop
it for some miles. He was empty with weariness, but there was no sleep
in him. Not even when they bound him amidst the wagons had he felt so
alone.

"Eodan."

He stopped under the garden wall. The buildings were blacknesses that
shouldered among paling stars; rails and roofs gleamed with dew. Beyond
the stableyard the land was still full of night. Phryne came to him.
"Are you up so early?" he asked in a small wonderment.

"I could not sleep," she answered.

"Nor I," he mumbled bitterly. "Though for another reason. I never
thought I could hate a woman while I embraced her."

"She must have found that interesting," said Phryne.

He heard the scorn in her voice; he did not know how much was intended
for him, but he felt the whole burden of it. He said through a
thickness in his lungs, "Why do I not bid them crucify me and be done?
I let her call my Hwicca foul names, and then I kissed her!"

"You must live," said Phryne gently.

"Why?"

"For--well--" She stood beside him, and somehow he came to think of a
certain brook, sun-speckled under airy beeches, long ago in Cimberland.
"Well, for what help you can give your wife," she finished, looking
straight before her, across the Samnian darkness.

"Which is none," he groaned.

Suddenly it burst within him. As if the sun had taken him full in the
eyes, he gasped and cried low, "But I can!"

"What?" Fear shadowed the face that swung to him. "How?"

"Hear me, Phryne," he whispered, rapidly, shaking with the knowledge of
it. "I will go hence. I know the road to Rome, I walked it the other
way last year. I can find his house there, and steal Hwicca away,
and--O Bull whose horns are the moon, why did you not make it clear to
me before?"

"You cannot!" A muted shriek. "You do not know the land, the city ...
every man who sees you will know your height and hair and--What use
will it be, to die on a cross or thrown to wild beasts?"

"Why, if my ghost has any strength at all, it may try again somehow,"
he said. "Or if not--well, I tried once. I gave Hwicca a man for a
husband to the very end." He lifted his hands to the eastern light, and
in Cimberland's tongue he called upon the day and the dark, the wind
and sea and all the Powers of earth to witness his promise.

Phryne flung herself to her knees. "Eodan, Eodan, you are a little
child among wolves! You know not what you say!"

"I know what I have said," he replied slowly. "I have sworn an oath
that is not able to be broken."

He felt the cold and the wet gloom before dawn close in on him. What
had he done, indeed? he thought. It was not well to make such enormous
promises without thinking carefully. He had belike pledged himself to
death.

But, if so, death was his weird and would not be stayed; for he had
invoked the very river of Time.

He shuddered with the awe of it, his teeth clenched together. "I will
leave in a few days, as soon as I can," he said. "You will forget we
ever spoke of this, will you not?"

Phryne rose again. She leaned against the wall, her cheek and palms to
its rough brick, her eyes closed. It was as though she drew on her own
roots of strength. At last, in a faraway voice, she answered him: "No,
I shall help you."




VI


Not till four days afterward did Phryne stop Eodan on the portico and
breathe: "I have made ready. Meet me in my chamber--do you know where
it is?--after sunset, and I will try to disguise you. Can you get
horses?"

His heart raced within him. He thought for a moment, standing under
fluted pillars with a green lawn and broad fields before him, standing
among thunders and drawn swords. At last he nodded. "There are
stableboys who sleep among the animals, but it will be simple enough
to frighten them, if I have any weapon. No one else will know until
morning."

"Then the gates of Tartarus will be opened!" Her eyes were huge and
her cheeks pale. "Let me see," she murmured. "I will have a sword for
you--I know where such tools are kept--and a couple of daggers as well.
You can overawe the boys, so they let themselves be bound and gagged
one by one. Drop a little word here or there, as if in carelessness, to
make them think you plan to flee into the mountains. That would be the
expected direction, anyhow, to reach Helvetia. Where did you think to
go, in truth, after Rome, Eodan?"

"I do not know," he said. "North, to some place where men are still
free. I do not know what the best way is."

"There is none," she told him. "They are all beset." Quickly,
leaning close so he could feel her breath upon his breast, swift and
frightened: "I am not so sure your best hope lies to the north. You
would have to cross too much Roman country. In the east or the south,
now.... But we can speak of that later. We dare not be seen lingering
like this. After dark, then--do not fail! I have contrived that the two
girls who sleep with me be out tonight. My supplies would be discovered
before another such chance came. So tonight!"

She went from him, almost running, the breeze fluttering her light
white gown about her. Eodan could not hold himself from staring. A
slave with the soul of a chief's daughter, he thought; surely some
Power had sent her across his path. He would have promised sacrifices
if he had known what Power it was, but the gods of this land were
unknown to him, and Cimberland's too far away to have heard about his
trouble.

Well--tonight!

He went on into the villa. It was hours till sundown; how would he live
through them without roaring his secret to the world? He would get
Cordelia's permission to go for a gallop. Yes, a good plan, thus he
could spy out his road of escape....

He found her in the peristyle. Her maids twittered and giggled, a plump
little scurrying bevy, wisps of cloth gay about a delicious roundedness
fore and aft. They were laying out towels, clean garments, the mistress
was pleased to swim in the pool. Cordelia stood aloof among them. As
she saw Eodan come between the pillars, she drew her half-discarded
stola about her. The dark Etruscan head lifted, and she said with an
unwonted chill, "What would you? Did you not hear the household was
forbidden to come here?"

"I beg pardon," said Eodan. "I was out--"

"Out! You have been out far too much. This is the place you are
supposed to guard. Where were you?"

Eodan thought back. On a certain morning he had made his vow to quit
this kept life. The next night she had still been exhausted, and he
slept in the guards' chamber. Since she had said nothing about it,
he had again slept with the guards the following darkness. The next
morning he offered the cattle overseer to help bring several beasts
of good stock from a neighboring plantation; they had not come back
till well after sundown, and he was tired and went directly to his
pallet.... Yes, by Fire itself, he had scarcely seen Cordelia in three
days!

"I am sure you knew my whereabouts, Mistress," he answered her. "If you
do not summon me to--to help you--." An uncontrollable giggling tinkled
around the sunlit space; Cordelia frowned and thinned her lips--"I
would not trouble you, Mistress," he finished.

She said slowly, "Is gratitude, then, not a barbarian habit?"

"But how have I done wrong?" he asked. He knew very well, and he could
not dissemble bewilderment he did not feel. Cordelia's face darkened.

"Go, all you women!" she snapped. "Let no one in here."

They fled, with squeaks of dismay; now Mistress was angry! Cordelia
walked slowly toward Eodan across gleaming mosaic. Her knuckles, where
she held up the loosened ungirdled stola, were bloodlessly taut.

"If you think so little of me that you will only come on command ...
that you will drive cows till midnight rather than even ask me if that
is my wish--" She was close to him now, speaking through knotted jaws.
"Don't think I have not seen you in corners with that Phryne! If you
find me dull, you may as well go back to the fields!"

I find you not dull but a foe, he wanted to say. There is too much
blood between us.

Aloud: "Mistress, I did not understand. I thought you would summon me."

Something eased within her. She laughed, low, and put her hands on his
shoulders. The gown fell about her feet. It could have been one of the
statues he had seen--Venus, in her aspect of hot sleepless nights--that
stood before him, save that veins pulsed under this skin and sweat
jeweled it in the sun. "Hercules, Hercules," she cried, "can you not
get it into your thick yellow head, I want to be the one commanded?"

He stepped back, stammering, feeling the will of Venus but remembering
she was Hwicca's enemy. "Mistress ... I cannot ... I am--"

"Tonight," she said eagerly. "Just at day's end. We will watch the sun
go down and we shall not sleep before it rises again."

O my weird which I invoked, help me now! he thought.

It came to him what he must do. And because the day was warm, and she
stood clothed only in sunlight and her loosened dark hair, and he had
slept alone for three nights, and he might be a flayed corpse in a few
days ... he trod forward with the Bull strong and exultant in his soul.

"Oh!" said Cornelia. "Hercules! No! Tonight, I told you!"

He grinned, pulled her to him, and held her one-handed with muscles
that had wrestled horned kine to earth, while his lips bruised hers and
his free hand roved up and down her body. "Well," she sighed finally,
"well, just once--"

When they had rested for a time, he stood up. "Come, into the pool!"
he said. She hung back. Laughing, he sprang. Water spouted, drenching
her. He swam to the edge where she crouched and hauled her after him.
She came up sputtering. He kissed her. She gave in and paddled about,
while he snorted and churned, porpoiselike, darting in again and again,
until at last it was she who urged him back onto the tiles.

Thereafter she complained that her body was sore from the hardness, so
they sought her bedroom. After a while she clapped her hands and had a
girl bring refreshments. And so it went till sundown.

As the first darkness came out of the east and up from the lower
valley, like smoke, Cordelia drew Eodan's head down upon her bosom and
held him there, with a grasp made gentle by weariness. "O Hercules,"
she whispered, "I thought there were no more men in the world worth
caring for."

He lay with closed eyes, drained of strength, wishing he could sleep,
wishing this were Hwicca.

"It is not only that you still my hunger," she murmured. Her voice was
trailing off, swallowed by sleep. "It is yourself. I am not lonely
under your kisses.... Be with me always, Hercules! I ask you--as a
beggar--I who love you...."

Eodan waited until he was sure she slept deeply. Then he took her arms
from about his neck and sat up. The room was dark and hot. He heard
the night outside, noisy with crickets. It was hard to remember that
he must not be contented with she who lay beside him. For a moment he
cursed his own foolishness, which had laid a weird on him.

But what was said could not be unsaid. He sighed, got to his feet and
fumbled about after his tunic. When he found it he stood for a little
while looking down at Cordelia; but his eyes were blurred with night.
Finally, not knowing why, he stooped and kissed her, not on the mouth,
but the brow.

Barefooted, he slipped across marble to the small tiring room beyond.
A bronze mirror caught enough light to prickle him with a thought of
ghosts. Beyond stood Phryne's door. The only bar was on this side, but
he knocked and waited till she opened it.

She stood with a lamp in her hand, dressed as during the day but with
her hair tumbled about her shoulders. The smoky oil flame touched eyes
that were too bright and lips that lacked steadiness. "So you came
after all," she said.

"I agreed to, did I not?" Eodan sat down. His knees shook with
exhaustion; he was unable even to feel afraid. He looked dully about
the room--a mere cubicle, three pallets on the floor, a table with some
combs and other things, a shelf holding many rolled-up books. Those
must be hers, he thought. A window faced unshuttered on blackness.

"I hope you completed your task," spat Phryne. "It would not do to
leave your owner unsatisfied before you go to your dear wife, would it?"

"Oh, be still," he said. "I had no choice. She would have had me come
to her and stay all night."

"Did you enjoy your work?" jeered the whisper.

"I did," he said, flat and cold on the unmoving air. "I do not know how
this concerns you. But, if you are so angry with me, I shall depart
without your help."

He half stood up. She pushed down on his shoulders. "No, Eodan!"
Suddenly frantic: "Zeus help us, no, it would be your death! I am sorry
for what I said. It was indeed no--no c-concern of mine."

He looked up, startled. She had turned her head and was wiping her
eyes with her knuckles, like a child. "Phryne," he asked, "what is the
matter?"

"Nothing. Come, we are spilling time." She drew a shaky breath, squared
her shoulders and went over to the table. From beneath it she dragged
a small wooden box. Squatting on the floor--as he saw her by that
guttering light, against monstrous unrestful shadows, he thought of a
Cimbrian god-wife, but a newly initiated one, young, shy, fair, riven
by the Powers she must now rein and drive--Phryne took out a bundle of
harsh gray cloth, a sheathed Roman sword and two long daggers, some
pots and bowls, and more.

"I have stolen enough money to fill a purse," she whispered. "And
these clothes will pass for a poor smallholder's. The hat will shade
your face from chance eyes. We will dye your hair black and cover that
barbarous tattoo with a bandage, as though it were some injury. Here,
bend over."

It was soothing to have her work upon his head, rinsing, rubbing in
the dye, combing. He felt a little strength flow into him. When she
was done she washed her blackened hands, cocked her head and smiled.
"There! Though we must take along a razor and shave that flax stubble
every day."

"We?" It grew upon him what she meant. He gaped. "But--you are coming,
too?"

"Of course," she said. "It would be--Eodan, if you tried to go out
alone, hardly knowing the road, not knowing Rome at all, with that
atrocious Latin and--" Her words became feverish. "Oh, Eodan, Eodan,
you Cimbrian mule, would you even know where to buy food? As well fall
on this sword at once and save everyone trouble!"

"Phryne," he said, wholly overcome, as though he were caught in
floating dreams, "your place here is good. What can I do for you? Why?"

She bit her lip and looked away. "It would be too easy to find out who
had helped you. I dare not stay."

He leaned forward, taking her hands. "But what am I to you? Why should
you help me at all, then?"

She jerked free, angrily. "I am a Greek," she snapped. "My grandfather
was a free man. None of this concerns _you_!"

Eodan shook his head in wonderment. But indeed, he thought in the
darkling Northern part of his soul, this was brought on when I invoked
the Powers; she is a part of my weird.

He dared ask no further. There was too much awe about her. Had he
indeed let a vessel of Power touch him, and lived?

"Freedom, freedom," said Phryne. "In a barbarous land, in sod huts and
stinking leather clothes, with not a book or a harp for a thousand
miles ... oh, truly, I shall be free!" Her laughter rattled. Eodan made
the sign against trolldom.

"Well, quickly," she said. "I could not be taken for any peasant girl,
so I must be a boy. There are the shears."

She crouched before him and waited. He took the long
crow's-wing-colored tresses in his hands, feeling that he offended some
spirit of loveliness. But--He cropped away until there were only ragged
bangs falling over her brow and her ears could be seen. She looked in a
mirror and sighed. "Gather them up," she said. "When we make a fire, I
will offer them to Hecate."

She pointed to the clothes. "Now, put that on! Do not stand there
gawping!" With a movement as of defiance, she undid her girdle, threw
it on the floor and stepped from her gown. Indeed she was beautiful,
thought Eodan. Her womanness did not flaunt itself, bursting through
its clothes like Cordelia's; it waited cool among shadows for one
discoverer. He grunted some apology when she glared, turned his back,
and fumbled on the garments laid out for him--a gray, patched woolen
tunic, scuffed sandals, a felt hat and a long wool cloak. He picked up
the heavy purse, slung a sword next to his skin and put a knife in the
rope belt.

As he took up his staff, he saw Phryne clad like him. The baggy cloth
would hide the shape of her body; she must hope the dirty old cape
would shield slim legs and high-arched feet. She was turning from the
shelf of books. She had run her fingers over the scrolls, just once,
and tears lay in her eyes.

"Come," she said. "We have only till morning; then they will start to
hunt us."




VII


To Eodan, Rome had been two things. First was the city of the Cimbrian
dream, all golden roofs above white colonnades, shimmering against a
sky forever blue. Then was the avenue of the triumph, where he bent his
weary head lest the hurled muck take him in the eyes, and thereafter
the slave pens and finally a stumbling in chains, one dawn, out onto
the Latin Way. Neither was of this earth.

Now he entered Rome herself, and he saw just a little of a city that
toiled and played and sang and dickered and laughed, plotted, feasted,
sacrificed, lied, swindled, and stood by friends--a city of men and
women and children like any others, built by men's hands and guarded
by men's bodies. He had thought Rome was walled, but he found as he
trudged through hours of buildings that she eternally outgrew her
walls, as though she were a snake casting skin, so that the old gates
stood open in the midst of a brawling traffic. He had thought of
Romans as divided into iron-sheathed rankers, piggish man-traders, and
one woman who shuddered in his arms; but he saw a gang of children
playing ball in the dust, a leathery smith in a clangorous tiny shop
and a limping man who cried out the roasted nuts he bore for sale in
panniers slung from a yoke. He saw Romans spread their wares in flimsy
booths while a temple gleamed purity above them. He saw a Roman matron,
in clothes no better than his, who scolded her small boy for being
reckless about passing horse-carts. He saw a young girl weeping, for
some reason he never knew, and he saw two young men, merry with wine,
stop to rumple the ears of an itinerant dog.

It growled about him, the heavy sound of laden wheels, echoing between
grimy brick walls. A haze hung in the air, smoke and dust, tinged
with garlic, cooked meat, new bread, perfume, horse dung, sewage,
garbage, human sweat. Folk milled about, shouting, waving their arms,
chaffering, thrusting a way past the crowds, somehow, anyhow. Once
Phryne was whirled from Eodan in such an eddy. He gasped with terror,
knowing he was indeed lost without her. She found her way back to him,
but thereafter he held her wrist.

They threaded their way toward the Esquiline Gate. "We must find an
inn," Phryne said; she had to shout through the noise. "The house is on
the Viminal Hill, but we could not go there clad as we are, nor before
dark in any case."

Eodan nodded dumbly. He let her lead him under the portal. A distance
beyond it was a shabby district of tall wooden tenements, where the
streets were slimy with refuse and the landless, workless scourings
of war and debt crouched in their rags waiting for the next dole.
He was too tired even to feel anger at the shouts from tooth-rotten
mouths. "Hail, peasant! A son of the soil, there are straws in his
hair! Aha, will you not lend us that pretty boy for a while? No, he
will not--they're a hard-fisted lot, these farmers. Cisalpine Gauls for
certain, see the ox look about 'em. But then where are their Gaulish
breeches? Ha, ha, lost their breeches, did they--now was it at dice or
what?"

Phryne, gone pale with wrath, led Eodan through twisted alleys until
they found an inn. The landlord sat outside, yawning and picking his
teeth with a thumbnail. "We would have a room for ourselves," she said.
"Half a sesterce," said the landlord. "Half a sesterce for this flea
pit? One copper as!" cried Phryne. They haggled while Eodan shuffled
his feet and looked about.

When at last he was alone with her, in a windowless box of a room, he
said, "The night winds take you, girl, what do we care for a copper
more or less? I feel a fool every place we stop, listening to you!"

"I wonder what they would have thought of two people who did not
bargain?" purred Phryne. "That they were in a suspicious haste to get
off the streets?"

It was too murky to read her face, but he had come to know that tone.
He could almost have traced out the quirk of her mouth and the mockery
of her eyes. "Oh, well, you rescued me again," he said. "I am a
blundering dolt. What shall we do next, captain, sir?"

"You have a wit like a bludgeon," she said. "Be quiet and let me
think." She threw herself on a pile of moldy straw and looked up at a
ceiling hidden as much by grime as by dimness.

Eodan hunched among the stinks and choked down his wrath. She had saved
him too often, in the days that lay behind. Her right to badger him was
earned.

He could have guided the first wild gallop himself, out of the estate
and down ringing dirt roads to the south. When they reached a stream,
they had dismounted and led their horses several miles northerly in its
channel, slipping and stumbling while the dark hours fled them; but he
would have done that, too, to cover his trail. They found another road
at last and went mercilessly along it toward the Latin Way; the horses
were ready to fall down by sunrise. Eodan would have turned them loose
then and gone ahead on foot; Phryne had made him, unwillingly, lead
them into a brushy ravine and kill them. But that was not a thought
Eodan might never have had--it was another trail-covering, after all,
and a chance to sacrifice for luck. She had told him to offer the
beasts to Hermes, whom he did not know, but he felt any god would have
been pleased.

No, he thought, thus far he could have come without her. He might even
have gone for many miles, sleeping by day and walking by night. But
when he blundered into a sheep-fold, and the dogs flew at him and the
shepherds came to club him for a thief, he could not have fobbed them
off with so ready a tale as Phryne had. He could never have passed
himself for a harmless man when they bought bread and wine on the way;
he would have had to steal his food, with all the risks. He reckoned
himself brave, but he had gone chill when she chattered merrily with a
wagoner chance-met at an inn; yet it ended with two days of riding on
a load of barley while the blisters on their soles eased. (He recalled
seeing in the first dawn how her feet bled from the river stones; but
she had said nothing.) She saved him having to answer any questions
at all in his accent when she remarked calmly that her poor brother
was a mute. The last two days, with houses and villages grown so thick
they dared not sleep out in the grass like vagabonds, she had gotten
rooms for them. (Formerly they had lain side by side, wrapped in
their cloaks, looking up at a sky frosty with stars, and she had told
him unbelievable things that the wise Greeks thought about heaven,
until he begged her to spare his whirling head. Then she laughed very
softly and said he knew the stars themselves better than she.) And now
in Rome--Yes, surely she belonged to his weird, for he saw now how
moonstruck had been his notion of entering Rome alone.

Nonetheless, at the few times weariness or wariness had not forbidden
them to speak freely, she was apt to be curt with him. He wondered how
he offended her. Once he asked, and she said for him to cease plaguing
her with foolish questions.

She stirred on the straw. "I will go out and buy us better clothing,"
she said. "After sunset I will take you to Flavius' house. I know a way
we can get in. But then it must be you who leads, for I have no more
plans in me."

"I have none," he said. "I will trust in whatever gods are willing to
guide us."

"If they guide us not to our doom," she said.

"That may well be. But if so, what can we do to stop it?" Eodan
shrugged. "I had thought we might steal Hwicca from the house--buy
boy's dress for her too, Phryne--and then if we could all get on a ship
bound somewhere--"

The girl sighed and left. Eodan stretched himself out and went to
sleep.

She came back with cloaks and tunics of better stuff than they wore, a
lamp and a jug of hot water and a basin borrowed from the innkeeper.
Once again he submitted to her razor. When she was done, she gestured
curtly at a loaf of bread and a cheese. "Eat," she said. "You may need
your strength."

He had been tearing at it for some time when he noticed that she sat
unmoving. "Will you not have some?" he asked.

Her tone was far-off, as if she had small care for what was to happen
to them. "I have no appetite."

"But you, too--"

"Let me alone!" she flared.

Presently they were out again upon the street. It was sunset time and
the crowds had thinned, so they moved quickly over mucked cobbles. "It
is as well to get into a better part of the city before dark," muttered
Phryne. "There could be robbers out."

Eodan lifted his staff. "I would give much for a good fight," he said.

Phryne looked at him, his eyes two heads above her own. "I understand,"
she said. Her fingers stroked lightly over his arm. "It will not be
long now, Eodan."

The tightness in his breast grew with every pace. As dusk settled over
the city, he found himself climbing a wide well-paved road up the
Viminal Hill, so that he could gaze down across roofs and roofs and
roofs, here and there a last pale gleam of temple marble, hazy blue
fading into black in the east, and many lit windows making an eldritch
earthbound star-sky, farther than a man could see. Faintly to him came
smoke, a sound of wheels or tired feet, a distant hail that quivered
upon still air. Once a horseman went by, casting the two plebeians an
incurious glance.

Hwicca, thought Eodan. Hwicca, I have not seen you for a thousand
years. I am going to see you tonight.

Though all the earth stood up to bar my way, I will hold you again
tonight.

The darkness thickened, until at last he heard his footfalls hollow on
unseen stones, until the houses on either side were little more than
black blocks. His heart beat so loudly that he could almost not hear
Phryne's final words: "We have found it." But he felt with unwonted
keenness how her hand clenched about his.

They stood before a sheer ten-foot wall. "The house lies within a
garden," she whispered. "No one watches the rear ... guests come in at
the other side ... there is a gate, but it would be locked now. If you
can raise me to the top, I will tie my belt to a bough I know and you
can follow."

Eodan made a cup of his hands. She stepped up, in a single flowing
movement, caught at his head to steady herself and murmured, "Now." He
lifted her carefully, but aware of her leg sliding along his cheek.
Then she had scrambled to the top, and he felt his way past rough
plaster until he found the cord she let down. He climbed it hand over
hand.

"Where is your staff?" hissed Phryne. "Down below," he said. "Have the
gods maddened you, to mark your own path? Back and get it!" she snapped.

When at last they stood in the garden, Eodan peered through the crooked
branches of a tree. No lights showed on this side. He guessed, from
remembering the villa, that kitchen and slave quarters were at this
end, but there would be a separate corridor on one side that the owners
used. Phryne led him to such a door. It creaked beneath her touch. She
halted, and time stretched horribly while they waited.

"No one heard," she sighed. "Come."

Two hanging lamps gave just enough light for them to see down the hall.
"To the atrium," whispered Phryne. "Nobody seems to be there. But the
Cimbrian girl stayed here--" She stopped in front of a door and touched
it with hands that shook. "Here, Eodan." He saw her mouth writhe, as if
in pain. "O Eodan, the Unknown God grant she be here!"

He found himself suddenly, coldly his own master. His fingers were
quite steady on the latchstring. The door opened upon darkness ... no,
there was a window at the end, broader than most Italian windows; he
had a glimpse of gray-blue night crossed with a flowering vine and one
trembling star.

He went through. His dagger slid from its sheath. If Flavius was here,
Flavius would not see morning. But, otherwise, he told himself, he must
keep Hwicca from yelling in her joy. Put a hand over her mouth, if he
must, or at least a kiss; silence was their only shield.

He padded over the floor, Phryne closing the door behind him. They
stood in shadows.

"Hwicca?" he whispered.

It rustled by the window. He heard a single Latin word: "Here."

He glided toward it. Now he saw her, an outline; she had been seated
by the window looking out. Her long loose hair and a white gown caught
what light there was.

"Is it you?" she asked, uncertainly. She used the "thou" form of
closeness, and it twisted him.

He reached her. "Do not speak aloud," he said, low, in the Cimbric.

He heard her breath drawn in so sharply that it seemed her lungs must
rip. He dropped his knife and made one more step, to take her in his
hands. She began to shiver.

"Eodan, no, you are dead," she cried, like a lost child.

"If he told you that, I shall tear his tongue out," he answered in a
wrath that hammered against his skull. "I am alive--I, Eodan, your man.
I have come to take you home, Hwicca."

"Let me go!" Horror rode her voice.

He caught her arms. She shook as if with fever. "Can you give us light,
Phryne?" he asked in Latin. "She must see I am no nightwalker."

Hwicca did not speak again. Having risen, she stood wholly mute. Her
hand brushed him, and he felt the palm had changed, had gone soft; she
had ground no grain and driven no oxen for nigh to a year. Oh his poor
caged darling! He let his own grasp go about her shoulders and then her
waist. He raised her chin and kissed her. The lips beneath his were
dead. In an overwhelming grief, that she should have been so hurt, he
drew her to him and laid her head on his breast.

Long afterward Phryne found flint and steel and a lamp. A tiny glow
herded immense misshapen shadows into the corners. Eodan looked upon
Hwicca.

She had not altered greatly to his eyes. Her skin was white now--the
sun had touched it seldom, the rain and wind never; but the same dear
small freckles dusted across her nose. She had taken on weight; she
was fuller about breast and hip. Her hair streamed in a loose mane past
a Roman gown and a Roman girdle, thin sheer stuff broidered with gold;
she wore a necklace of opals and amber. He did not like the perfume
smell, but--"Hwicca, Hwicca!"

Her eyes seemed black, wrenched upward to his. They were dry and
fever-bright. Her shaking had eased, until he could only feel it as a
quiver beneath the skin. "I thought you were killed," she told him,
tonelessly.

"No. I was sent to a farm south of here. I escaped. Now we shall go
home."

"Eodan--" The cold, softened hands reached down, pulling his arms away.
She went from him to the chair in which she had been seated when he
came in. She sat upon it, her weight against one arm, and stared at the
floor. The curve of thigh and waist and drooping head was a sharp pain
to him.

"Eodan," she said at last, wonderingly. She looked up. "I killed
Othrik. I killed him myself."

"I saw it," he said. "I would have done so, too."

"Flavius brought me here," she mumbled.

"That was not your wish," he answered, through a wall in his throat he
had raised against tears.

"There was only one thing that gave me the strength to live," she said.
"I thought you had died."

Eodan wanted to take her in one arm, lead her out, hold a torch in the
other hand; he would kindle the world and dance about its flames. He
went to her, instead, and sat down at her feet, so she must look at him.

"Hwicca," he said, "it was I who failed. I brought you to this land of
sorrow; when we were wedded, I could have turned our wagon northward. I
let myself be overcome by the Romans. I even left you my own task, of
free--freeing our son. The anger of the gods is on my head, not yours."

"Do you think I care for any gods now?" she said.

Suddenly she wept, not like a woman but like a man, great coughing
gulping sobs that pulled the ribs and stretched the jaws. She lifted
her head and howled, the Cimbrian wolf howl when they mourn for their
slain. Phryne stepped back, drawing her knife by the door, but no one
came. Perhaps, thought Eodan, they were used to hearing Flavius' new
concubine yell.

Hwicca reached for him with unsteady hands and brushed them across his
mouth. "You kissed me," she cried. "Now see what you kissed off." He
looked upon a greasy redness. "My owner likes me painted. I have tried
to please him."

Eodan sat in numbness.

Hwicca fought herself to quiet. Finally she said, stammering and
choking, "He brought me here. He left me alone ... for many days ...
until I had used up all my tears. At last he came. He spoke kindly. He
offered his protection if--if--I should have asked him for a spear in
my heart. I did not, Eodan. I gave him back his kindness."

He had thought many ugly fates for her. This he had not awaited.

"Go," she said. "Go while it is still dark. I have money, I will give
you what I have. Leave this place of men's deaths, go north and raise
me a memory-stone if you will--Eodan, I am dead, leave the dead alone!"

She turned away, looking into night. He got up, slowly, and went to
where Phryne was standing.

"Well?" said the Grecian girl. "What is the trouble?" Her tone was
unexpectedly stinging, almost contemptuous; it jerked him like a whip.

He bridled with an anger at her that drained off some of the hurt
Hwicca had given. "She yielded herself to Flavius."

"Did you expect otherwise?" asked Phryne, winter-cold. "It is one thing
to fall on your own sword in battle's heat--another to be a captive
alone, and get the first soft word spoken in weeks! Romans have long
known how to harness a soul."

"Oh ... well--" Eodan shook his head, stunned. "It is not that. I
looked for nothing else, I have seen too many women taken ... But she
will not come with me now, Phryne!"

The Hellene stared across the room at Hwicca, who sat with her face
hidden in her hair. Then she glanced about at clothes and jewels and
whatever else a man was blind to. She nodded.

"Your wife told you she did not merely obey," she said to Eodan. "She
tried to please Flavius. She wanted to."

He started. "Are you a witch?"

"Only a woman," said Phryne. "Eodan, think, if you are able. She
believed you dead, did she not? I heard the gossip in this household
last winter. And Flavius was a man, and there was life in this woman,
enough life to draw you here into the she-wolf's throat to get her
back! What would you have her do?"

Phryne brought down her foot so the floor thudded. Beneath the
boy-cropped dark bangs she regarded Eodan with eyes that crackled. Her
scorn flayed him: "She feels she has betrayed you because, for a while,
she kissed Flavius willingly. She will send you off and remain here,
caged, waiting for him to tire of her and sell her to a brothel and so
at last to destruction and a corpse rotting in the Tiber. She will damn
herself to that, for no other reason than that she remained a living
woman! And you, you rutting, bawling, preening man-thing, you think you
might actually go from her as she asks?"

Phryne snatched up a vase and hurled it shattering at his feet. "Well,
go then," she said. "Go, and the Erinyes have you, for I am done with
you!"

Eodan stared, from one to another of them, for very long. Finally he
said, "What thanks I owed you before, Phryne, can be forgotten beside
this."

He went to Hwicca, stood behind her, pulled her head back against him
and stroked her hair. "Forgive me," he said. "There is much I do not
understand. But you shall come with me, for I have always loved you."

"No," she whispered. "I will not. There is no luck in me. I _will_ not!"

He wondered, with a deep harsh wound in the thought, how wide of the
mark Phryne, too, might have been. But if they lived beyond this
night--if his weird should carry him back to Jutland horizons--he would
have their lifetimes to learn, and to heal.

But first it was to escape.

Boierik's son said calmly, "You are going with us, Hwicca. Let me hear
no more about that."




VIII


But still they tarried. A new thought had come to Eodan. When he asked
Phryne, she said it was good--less hopeless, at least, than most things
they might attempt.

They sat in the chamber and waited. Little was spoken. Hwicca lay on
the couch, after Eodan told her to rest. She stared at the ceiling;
only her lungs moved. Eodan sat beside her, stroking her hair. Phryne
kept her back to them.

The night grew gray. Hwicca had said Flavius was out to some banquet.
Eodan began to wonder if her own slave-girls might not come in to
attend her before the Roman returned. That could be a risky thing,
capturing them!

The Cimbrian had not dreamed he would be glad to see Flavius again,
save as an object of revenge. But when "_Vale!_" and laughter sounded
in the hall, and a little afterward the latch went up, he drew his
sword and glided to the door with more happiness than the night had yet
given him.

Flavius entered. He wore a wine-stained toga and a wreath slightly
askew. He saw Hwicca sitting up on the couch and raised his free arm.
"Are you awake, my dear? I did not mean to be so late. It was tedious
without you--"

Eodan put the sword against his back and laid a hand on his shoulder.
He closed his fingers as tightly as he could, so that Flavius gasped
with pain. "If you cry out, you are a dead man," said Eodan.

Phryne closed the door. Flavius turned about with great care. Lamplight
gleamed on steel. For a moment the Roman's narrow, curving face was
nearly fluid, as he struggled to cast off bewilderment and wine.
Then it steadied. The dim light sparkled wet across his brow, but he
straightened himself.

"Eodan," he said. "I did not know you at once, with your hair black."

"Not so loudly," said Phryne. She barred the door and circled about,
her own dagger cocked for an underhanded stab in the way Eodan had
shown her.

"But where did you find this handsome boy?" asked Flavius as if a gibe
would armor him.

"No matter that," snapped the Cimbrian. He looked into the other man's
rust-colored eyes. A lock of hair had fallen across one of them. Eodan
thought of Hwicca's hands brushing it back, and for a moment he stood
in flames.

A year ago he would have seen Flavius' heart. A few months back, he
would have found some quiet place and stretched his revenge through
days. But, on this night, he shuddered to stillness. His blade was
almost at Flavius' throat; the Roman had backed against the wall,
panting, trying to shed his clumsy toga.

Eodan skinned his teeth and said, "You owe me a heavy blood price. You
can never pay it, not with all your lands. So for my honor I should
kill you. But I will forego that. It is more to my honor that we three
here gain our own lives back."

"I could manumit you," whispered Flavius through sandy lips.

Eodan laughed unmirthfully. "How long afterward would we live? No, you
shall see us to safety. Once we are beyond Rome's reach, we can let you
go. Meanwhile, you shall not be without us. This sword will be under my
cloak. Do not think to trick us and call for help, because, if it even
looks as if we are not going to get free, I will kill you."

Flavius nodded. "Let me past," he said. Eodan drew the blade back a few
inches. Flavius walked to a table, shedding his toga. Eodan followed
each step. Flavius took a wine jug and poured into a chalice; he drank
with care.

Then, turning about and looking straight up at Eodan: "I would be
interested to know how you escaped. It is a leak I must plug, when this
affair is over."

The Cimbrian answered with relish: "Part of the road went through your
wife's bed."

"Oh, so." Flavius nodded again. His wits had returned; they had never
flown far. His face was almost a mask, save that the shadow of a smile
played now and then across it. He moved with the wildcat ease Eodan
remembered, unshaken and unhurried.

"No matter!" snapped Phryne. "I have thought what we must do." Flavius
regarded her with measuring eyes. "At this season, ships leave each day
for all ports. You will engage passage for a short trip--that can be
done without exciting too much gossip--let us say to Massilia in Gaul.
We shall all four go."

"Massilia is subject to Rome," Flavius reminded her.

"But it is not many days' travel by horse to the frontier. Beyond lies
Aquitania, which is free. Even I have heard how the Gauls are still in
upheaval after the Cimbrian trek. We can make our own way among them.
And you can return home from there."

Flavius stroked his chin. "Phryne, is it not?" he mused. "Cordelia's
slave, become a most charming boy. Do you think to instruct the
barbarians in Greek?"

"Enough," growled Eodan.

"I think you have breathed fever-mists," said Flavius. "Do you really
believe you can make your way through all Rome and Gaul--alive?"

"We have come thus far," said Phryne. In the earliest sky-lightening,
Eodan saw how her eyes were dark-rimmed from weariness. He himself felt
bowstring tense; sleep would be his enemy.

"What have we to lose?" he added to the girl's words.

Flavius looked over at Hwicca. She sat on the bed's edge, white-mouthed
and red-eyed, watching them like a leashed dumb beast. "Much, my
friend," said Flavius. "As runaway slaves, you should be killed, or at
least whipped and branded, but I could still save you. I could say you
went on a secret errand for me. I could not save you if you were caught
after having taken a Roman citizen hostage."

"Would you spare us even now?" snorted Eodan. "What oath can you give
me?"

"None," said Flavius. "You would have to chance my mood. But be sure
I have no complaint against Hwicca--yet. If she is taken with you,
though, abetting your flight and my capture, she will also die, piece
by piece." He shook his head. "Eodan, Eodan, you meant to save this
girl, but you will give her to death!"

"Better that than you!"

"Do you not understand?" said Flavius gently. "It would not be a quick
throat-cutting. The least she could await would be the arena beasts,
under the eye of all Rome. But the people have developed more refined
tastes in such matters--and they are savage in their fear of slave
mutiny. A servile war was ended only months ago in Sicily; I do not
think she would merely face lions."

It was as though some hand closed on Eodan's heart. His wrist went
slack, the sword drooped downward.

"Hwicca," he mumbled, "what have we done to the Powers?"

Flavius smiled in his own locked manner and held out his hand. "Will
you give me that sword?" he asked.

Phryne whirled upon Hwicca. "You lump!" she yelled. "Is it you that he
would die for?"

The Cimbrian girl shook herself. She got to her feet and moved across
the floor like a sleepwalker. "No, Eodan," she said in their own
tongue. "Hold fast."

There was scant life in her voice, but it tapped the wells of his
inward self. Eodan drew his head up again, so that he loomed over them
all, and laughter grew in his mouth. He jabbed at Flavius' throat,
forcing the Roman back. "We sail today," he said in Latin. "Or else you
shall be spitted on this. And I will be swift enough afterward to kill
the girls and fall on the blade myself."

Flavius caught a breath as though to speak, met Eodan's green gaze and
blew out again. He spread his hands and shrugged.

"Now," said Phryne, "we must have a plausible story for your sudden
departure. Eodan and I are Narbonensian Gauls who have brought you an
urgent message from your kinsman Septimus, who resides in Massilia."

"You kept your ears wide while you ate my salt, Phryne," said Flavius,
with a sidelong glance at Hwicca.

The Grecian girl swiped the air, angrily, and went on: "You need say
little more. Speak of a chance to invest money, and all will expect
you to be close-mouthed. No one knows Eodan, so he will accompany you
about the house; but you will stay within doors, sending your slaves
out on the needful errands. When the social calls are paid you in the
forenoon, your doorkeeper must turn them back on the plea that you are
sick from too much wine. I shall remain here, lest I be recognized.
Food will be brought to this door for Hwicca and myself, but no one is
to enter save you two."

She turned to the Cimbrian as she continued: "Eodan, do you know about
writing--the marks made by stylus or quill? Good. Be sure he writes
nothing that I do not see him write. Also, be sure that he speaks only
in Latin. If he says two words running that you do not understand, kill
him!"

Flavius pursed his lips. He regarded her for a long while before he
said, very softly, "And I hardly knew you existed, little one."

"Well, go!" She stamped her foot. "It will take time to find out about
ships. Rouse a man now to inquire."

Eodan draped his cloak around the sword, which he carried bare under
his left arm, and followed Flavius out.

The morning dragged. There was a clepsydra in the atrium. Once, when
Eodan asked, Flavius told him how it counted time. Thereafter the
Cimbrian sat listening to its drip, drip, drip, and shuddered under a
tightly held calm; for this was trolldom, where each falling drop eked
out another measure of a man's life.

This waiting was the hardest thing he had yet done. Flavius himself
suggested a casual remark to be made to the porter, explaining why the
Gauls had not been seen entering the house--he had heard them talk
beneath his garden wall, climbed a ladder in curiosity and invited
them over! He dealt smoothly enough with his stewards and errand boys.
He reclined on the couch, chatting plausibly of Gallic affairs, when
food was served him and Eodan. He seemed to enjoy the scandalized
faces of his older retainers when they saw a Roman so familiar with a
provincial. Why, it was unheard-of--they went to the privy together!
But chiefly there was nothing to do but wait. Eodan stayed within a
quick lunge of Flavius, never taking eyes off him. Flavius shrugged
lightly, called for some books and lay on a couch reading when he did
not nap. It had never before seemed to Eodan that hours on end of
silence could be a torment.

Word came about noon--a small galley was to leave Ostia for Massilia
next sunrise. It carried only cheap wares, glass goods made in slave
factories for barbarian markets ... perhaps a chance person or two
paid a few sesterces for space on deck, carrying their own food.
Surely the great Master Flavius would not travel in such a tub? And
with three companions! In another few days a fine trireme with ample
accommodations would depart--Well, if Master Flavius insisted--Well, if
he would pay that generously, the officers would turn their cabin over
to his party and sleep under canvas themselves, but of course Master
Flavius must not expect the cabin to be very comfortable; one would
advise that he bring his own mattress....

And then it was again to wait.

Once Eodan caught himself nodding. His eyes had closed; all at once
he realized it and opened them with a gasp. Flavius looked up from a
scroll and chuckled. "You only slept for a heartbeat," he said. "But
how long do you think you can keep awake?"

"Long enough!" spat the Cimbrian.

The household bustled, shouted, chattered, a whirl of pompous orders
and acknowledgments. There would be a hive's buzzing about this,
thought Eodan, his mind creaking with weariness. And some of Rome's
mighty folk would hear and wonder. No matter, though. He would be at
sea by that time, ahead of any messages. Once out of Massilia town,
with a saddle beneath him and a string of remounts, he could race the
whole Roman army to Aquitania.

They left for Ostia, in mid-afternoon, with four chariots. Flavius
drove one, reckless and skilled. Eodan stood beside him and knew
unsureness, as he hung onto the bumping, bouncing, rattling thing, not
knowing whether he would be able to wield sword and not lose his feet.
Hwicca and Phryne paced them in another. The Cimbrian girl held reins
and whip; she had never driven such a wagon before, but she kept an
even distance behind Flavius, and looking back Eodan saw in a glad leap
of his heart that she smiled! The other two cars bore only a man apiece
and the needful travel goods; also some purses, fat with auri, to see
them through this land where gold had more strength than iron.

Even in these days of a dying Republic, when new wealth openly flouted
old laws, this was no common faring on the Ostian Way. Wagoners,
horsemen, foot travelers, porters, donkey drivers, men in tavern doors
and cottage windows and haughty gates, the rich matron in a litter and
all her bearers, child and laborer and aged beggar--all must stare at
four galloping chariots with a Roman guiding one and a yellow-haired
foreign woman the next. Well, let them talk too, thought Eodan. He
wished he could give Rome a redder memory of his passage.

Though this road was broad and superbly paved, there were miles to
go. Once they stopped to change teams. It was after dark when they
entered the Ostian streets. Torches flared; the horses stumbled on
cobblestones. Flavius looked wind-flushed at Eodan and laughed. "Thank
you for a good ride, at least! Now, shall we to an inn?"

"No." It was hard to think clearly, with a skull full of sand. But
every stop, every man they spoke to, was another hazard. "Let us go
aboard at once."

Flavius clicked his tongue, but turned the chariot down toward the
waterfront. There was just enough light, from the city and the pharos
in the outer harbor, for Eodan to see a world of ships. Their spars
hemmed in the sky. Many of them were lit by torch or firepot, so that
slaves could continue loading. Such was the galley they sought.

It was, indeed, neither large nor beautiful. It was battered, in need
of paint, reeking of tar and slavery. The small bronze figurehead was
so corroded you could not tell what it had been intended to depict. Ten
ports on a side showed where the oars would emerge; through them came
a sound of chains and animal sleep. Phryne gagged at the smell. A line
of near-naked dock workers moved up and down a gangplank, bearing cases
to be stowed in the hold, while an overseer and an armed guard watched.
There was also a stout, dark, bearded man with a rolling gait who
came up, gave a bear's bow and said he was Demetrios, captain of this
vessel. He had not been expecting his distinguished passengers yet.

"Take us to our cabin," said Flavius. "We would sleep a few hours
before you leave."

"The noise, master," said the captain. "You would not sleep at all, I
fear."

Eodan looked wildly about. He had not thought of this ... if the
Demetrios man grew suspicious--what to do, what to do?

Flavius winked and jerked his thumb at Hwicca and Phryne. "I should not
have said 'sleep,' captain."

"Oh," said Demetrios enviously. "Of course."

They went up on deck. There was a high poop, where the great steering
oar was lashed; the stem-post curled up over it like a flaunting tail.
The forecastle stood somewhat lower, bearing a rough tent erected for
the officers. The free deckhands would bed in the open, as always.
Amidships rose the single mast, with a flimsy cabin just aft where
Flavius' attendants laid down his gear. A lamp showed it windowless,
though crannies let in ample cold air, and bare save for a little
wooden sea-god nailed to his shelf.

Demetrios bowed in the doorway. "Good night, then, noble master," he
said. "I hope we'll get a pleasant voyage."

Flavius smiled graciously. "I am sure we will."




IX


"Well, now!" said the Roman when they sat behind a closed door. He
stretched himself across one of the mattresses, boylike on his belly,
and reached for a leather bottle of good wine. His grin leaped at the
others. "Thus far, my friends, well done. Shall we pledge our mutual
success?"

Eodan opened his cloak and let the sword slide to his knees. His left
arm was stiff and pained from holding the blade pressed to his ribs,
hours at a time. He looked with sullen red eyes at his enemy and said:
"No. I will pledge your ghost in your own blood, nothing else."

Phryne hugged her knees and stared from a drawn small face. "It is best
that Flavius not leave this cabin all the voyage," she said. "He can
plead seasickness. Two of us must be with him at any time, awake."

"Oh, one will do," said Eodan. His jaws felt rusty. "At least, if the
other two are here, asleep but ready to be called."

"Bind him," said Hwicca timidly.

Flavius raised his brows. "If a sailor should chance to look in upon us
and saw me bound--" he murmured.

"It is true." Eodan's head drooped. He jerked it back again. "Be as
wise in our behalf as you have been, Roman, and you will see Rome
again."

Flavius poured himself a cup. "Do you think so?" he asked lightly. "I
doubt that."

"I have promised."

"How much will your word be worth to you, once we reach a wild land
where you have no further need of me for shield?" Flavius' eyes rested
candidly on Hwicca, above the rim of his cup. A slow, deep flush went
up her throat and cheeks. She drew herself into a corner, away from
them all, but her gaze remained locked with his.

"Not that I expect us ever to get that far," went on Flavius. "Your
luck has been good until now--"

"A Power has been with me," said Eodan, and touched his forehead where
the holy triskele lay under a grimy cloth.

"So you may think. But what educated man can take seriously those
overgrown children on Olympus?" The Roman nodded at Hwicca. "We spoke
of this now and then, you and I. Do you remember? There was a time you
gathered jasmine blossoms--"

"Be still about that or I will forget my word!" roared Eodan in the
Cimbric. Hwicca huddled back and lifted an arm, as though to ward off a
blow.

"As you wish," said Flavius, unruffled. "To continue--" A crash
outside, and the sound of swearing and a whip, interrupted him--"I
myself do not believe in any Power except chance. There are blind
moieties of matter, obeying blind laws; only the idiot hand of chance
keeps each cycle of centuries from being the same. Now it is very
possible, by chance, to throw the same number at dice several times
sequentially. It is not possible forever, my friend. I think you
have thrown about as many good numbers as any man in the world ever
did. Soon your luck must turn. You shall be found out through some
happenstance. You will then try to kill me. One way or another, we
shall all die. You and Phryne and Hwicca and myself, all dead--mold in
our mouths and our eye sockets empty." Flavius tossed off his wine and
poured another cup. "It is inevitable."

Eodan snarled, out of a chill, dreary foreboding, "If you say more such
unlucky words, I will--no, not kill you--each such word will cost you a
tooth. Now hold your mouth!"

Flavius shrugged gracefully. Phryne closed her eyes. Beneath the
booming and the voices on deck, there was silence.

Finally Eodan turned to his wife. She would not meet his look. When he
took her hand, it lay slack on his palm.

"Hwicca," he said, burred Cimbric low and unsure in his throat. "Pay
him no heed. We shall be free."

"Yes," she said, so he could scarcely hear it.

"That 'yes' was not meant," he told her. His heart lay a lump in his
breast.

She said in a torn voice: "There is no freedom from that which was."

"Little Othrik," said Eodan. He looked at his wife's hand and
remembered how his son's baby fingers had curled about his thumb. He
shook his head and smiled. "No--him we shall always mourn.... But it
would be worse if we sailed off leaving him to grow up a Roman's beaten
beast. You could not have done otherwise. There will come more children
to us, and some of them will die of this or that; so it has ever been.
But some will live, Hwicca."

She shook her head, still averting herself. "I am dishonored."

"Not so!" he said harshly. "If you would--" He glanced at Flavius,
who raised brows and smiled. Then he put his lips by Hwicca's ear to
breathe: "I gave him no true oath. We can sacrifice him in Gaul; that
will remove all stain from you."

"_No!_" She cried it aloud, pulling free of him. The face he looked
upon was filled with terror.

"As you like," he floundered. "Whatever you wish. But remember, I am
your husband. It is for me to say if you are guilty, and I say you are
not."

"Let me alone," she pleaded. "Let me alone."

Eodan sat listening to her dry sobs. He hefted his sword, dully
thinking about its use. He had never fought with such a weapon; the
Cimbrian blades were for hewing, and this was for stabbing....

Phryne crept over the narrow space and touched his arm. "Wait," she
whispered. He saw a helpless look in her eyes, as if she sat watching a
child being burned out by fever. "Give her time, Eodan. I know not what
the Cimbrian law is--I suppose your women were chaste--it means more to
her, what has happened, than you can know."

"I do not understand," he said. "There is some witchcraft here. I do
not understand her any longer."

"Wait, Eodan. Only wait."

He squatted into his own corner, under the low roof, and looked across
to Flavius. The Roman had closed his eyes and stretched out; could he
really sleep now?

At last the noise ended. Eodan saw Hwicca fall asleep herself, curled
like a child. There was that much to thank the dark Powers for. Phryne
and he seemed too weary to rest, or too taut. Yet no thoughts ran in
his head; it felt hollowed out, and time did not flow for him. When a
new clamor began, and he felt the ship move, it was a jarring surprise.
Already!

He opened the door and looked out. The deckhands had cast loose, the
oars were walking, he heard rowlocks creak and the muffled gonging of
the stroke-setter beneath his shoes. They slipped through a channel
between many hulls still one dark mysterious mass. Ostia and Italy
behind her lay misty under the first saffron clouds; ahead, the
Tyrrhenian Sea caught a few wan gleams. There were stars in the west.

The sailors, shivering in tunics or mere loincloths, scurried over the
deck doing things unknown to Eodan. They were a ruffianly-looking lot,
swept from many ports of the Midworld Sea--a hairy Pamphylian, a brown
Libyan, a big-nosed Thracian, a brawny red-faced Gaul, another two or
three whom Eodan could only guess about. Captain Demetrios walked among
them, a sword at his waist, a light whip in his hand. He saw Eodan and
came over, beaming snag-toothed in his beard.

"Good morning," he said. "You had a--hah!--pleasant night with your
woman and your boy?"

Eodan grunted. "How long to Massilia?"

"Oh, perhaps five days, maybe more, maybe less. Much depends on the
wind. I've a fear it will turn against us." Demetrios cocked his head.
"Where are you from? I thought I'd seen 'em all, till you turned up."

Eodan said in Cimbric, "You Southland swine!"

"And where's that?" asked Demetrios. But Eodan had closed the door
again. The cabin was smoky and foul after the deck. He wondered if he
could really smell the human agony that seeped up from the rowers' pit.

Flavius opened an eye. "Have you foreseen you might get sick from the
waves?" he asked amiably.

"I have foreseen kicking your ribs in!" grated Eodan.

Flavius nodded at Hwicca, who had also awakened. She sat up with chin
on knees and shivered. "Do you see, my dear, it is too much to expect
that I should be released if we ever get into Aquitania," he murmured.
"It would be asking more of your husband than one may even ask of a
god."

Hwicca gave Eodan a forlorn glance. He laid himself upon a mattress
near her. "You will swear he shall have his life, will you not?" she
asked fearfully.

He said, out of his bitterness: "You are loyal to your owner, Hwicca!"

She shrank back with a little whimper.

"No more of that," said Phryne sharply. "We are certain not to outlive
this trip if we quarrel among ourselves." She regarded Hwicca closely.
"You look strong," she said, "and I daresay you have some knowledge of
weapons."

The Cimbrian girl nodded, wordless.

"Well, then," said Phryne, "Eodan and I can do no more without rest.
You have slept a while, now watch Flavius for us. It is simple enough.
Hold this sword. Stay out of his reach. If he makes a suspicious move,
call us. If it looks as if he might escape, stab!"

Hwicca took the heavy blade. "That much ... yes," she said in the
Cimbric.

Eodan laughed, without mirth, but not uncomforted. He curled on his
side to face her. The last sight he had, before sleep smote, was the
unsure smile with which she looked at him....

Her scream wakened Eodan.

He sprang to a crouch. He had a moment's glimpse of Flavius' tall form
stooped beneath the roof. The Roman was at the door, and Hwicca was
plunging toward him. Flavius kicked out. He got her swordbearing arm.
She cried aloud, fell and tried to seize his feet. He fumbled with the
latch, kicking her again.

Eodan roared and sprang, but it was too narrow a space. He stumbled
over Hwicca. Phryne had just come awake. Sleep spilled from her,
and she grabbed for her knife. Eodan picked himself up from his
entanglement with Hwicca as Flavius got the door open. Eodan rushed for
him.

They went backwards out on the deck. Eodan reached after Flavius'
throat. The Roman's knees were doubled up before his stomach. He
straightened them enough to fend off the Cimbrian, rolled over and
shouted.

"Help! Captain! Slave mutiny! Help!"

Eodan grasped for him, missed again and saw the Libyan sailor's legs
pounding up. The Libyan was swinging a club. Eodan scrambled back from
the blow and bounced to his feet. The Libyan yelled and raised the club
high. Eodan's fist leaped, and he felt bone and flesh crunch under his
knuckles. The Libyan choked and sat down.

Wildly, Eodan looked toward the bow. He had a glimpse of sea that
sparkled blue beneath a sun close to noon. The ship rolled gently, but
to an opposing wind; they were still only oar-powered. The land was
a thin streak to starboard. Flavius stood in a knot of men under the
forecastle, pointing back to the cabin and yelling.

"Give me that sword!" bawled Eodan.

Phryne came out with it. The wind rumpled her short dark hair, the sun
blinked on her knife blade. Her tilted face looked forward in the calm
of--hopelessness? No, Hwicca sobbed behind her, saying, "There are
worse endings. Kill me, Eodan."

"No!" he cried. "Come, follow me! _By the Bull_--"

He lifted his sword and ran aft. The sailors in the bow milled, unsure.
Demetrios exhorted them. Up on the poop, the steersman gaped and let go
his oar. The ship heeled as the wind brought it about. Eodan stumbled,
regained his feet and reached the hatch he wanted.

It stood open. The stench of the grave boiled from it. Even in that
moment he was close to retching. But--"Down in there!" he rapped, and
sprang first, ignoring the ladder.

He struck a platform where the gong-beater stood, staring, mouth open
like a fish. Eodan stabbed once. The gong-beater screamed, caught at
his belly and sank to his knees.

Eodan looked down the length of the pit. Overhead was the main deck.
Before him was an oblong well, with ten benches on either side and a
man chained to each. He could not see them as more than a blur--here
a bleached face, there a tangle of hair. A catwalk ran down the
middle, above the seats. Light came in shafts through the hatch and
the oar-ports. As the ship rolled, a sunbeam would sickle up and down,
touching a rib or a strake or a human face, and then flee onward. It
was noisy here--timbers groaned, waves slapped the hull, rowlocks
creaked, chains rattled.

The overseer came at a run along the catwalk. He was a big man with a
smashed, hating face. He was bearing a whip with leaded thongs and a
trident for prodding or killing. "Pirates!" he whooped. "Pirates!"

A beast-howl lifted from the benches. Oars clattered in their locks;
the men stood up and barked, grunted, yammered. Eodan could not tell
whether it was fear or wrath. And his life depended on which it was.

As the overseer reached him, Eodan crouched. The overseer stabbed.
Eodan swayed his body aside, as though this were a bull's horn in the
Cimbrian springtime games. He should have thrust in his turn, but habit
was too strong. He struck downward with his sword. The overseer's
trident was wrenched loose and went ringing to the platform.

The man's mouth opened. Perhaps he cursed, but Eodan could not hear
above the slave-racket. His fingers clawed for a hold, to wrestle the
Cimbrian. Eodan got him by belt and throat, heaved him up over his
head, and roared aloud.

"Here! He's yours!"

And hurled the overseer into darkness.

"Eodan," cried Hwicca. Her hands fell frantic upon his body. He looked
into wild eyes. "What would you do?"

"No time to hunt for keys to the locks," he rapped. "Pick up that
trident. Pry the shackles off these men!"

Hwicca stood back, staring. The slaves hooted and jumped about. A
swift sunbeam caught bared teeth down in the murk. They could hear the
overseer being ripped apart.

"Can you hold the crew off long enough?" called Phryne.

"I had better!" said Eodan.

He pulled off his cloak and whirled it around his left arm. The
gong-beater caught feebly at his heels. He stamped down the hand and
bounded up the ladder.

The sailors were nearing. All of them had weapons, such as were kept
against pirates. Demetrios was bearing a shield and helmet as well.
Flavius was walking beside him.

"There he is!" bellowed the captain, and feet thudded on the planks.
Eodan went down again and waited.

There was grunting and cursing at his back. Once the girls had a man
or two free, it would go faster.... But if I were a slave, he thought,
with the mind beaten out of me, I might not use a sudden woman for
anything but--Here is a man to fight!

It was the Libyan, with a broken nose to avenge. He came down the
ladder quickly, facing forward in sailor fashion, bearing a short
spear. In the shifting gloom he was not much more than another shadow.
Eodan poised himself. The spear punched at his stomach. He caught the
point in his wadded cloak, shoved it aside and stepped in. The Libyan
howled, but was scarcely heard above the howling of the galley slaves.
Eodan slid the sword into him. The sailor did not seem to feel it. He
backed against the ladder, pulled his spear free and struck. Eodan did
not quite sidestep it. The edge raked his shoulder. As the Libyan moved
in, Eodan chopped at the wooden handle of his enemy's weapon. Roman
iron bit; he caught it. The Libyan wrestled him for the shaft. Eodan
jerked. The Libyan lost his balance, slipped in his own pouring blood
and fell into the pit.

Eodan glanced up. The sky in the hatch blinded him. He could only see
that someone was looking down. As if from far away, he heard Demetrios:
"Throw a kettle of boiling water. He cannot withstand that!"

"He can retreat onto the catwalk," said Flavius, "and come back to meet
the next man we send. No, let one sailor carry that kettle down the
ladder. The barbarian cannot attack him without being scalded. Two or
three others can come directly behind--"

Gasping, Eodan turned toward the benches. It had quieted a little. He
heard links clash in the darkness. A staple screamed as it was torn out
of a timber.

"Follow me!" shouted Eodan. "Break your oars for clubs! There are no
more than six or seven men up there! You can be free!"

They shuffled and mumbled in the dark. He glimpsed a few who had been
released holding up their dangling chains in a dull, wondering way.
They were loathsome with sores and scars.

A voice yelled back to him: "We can be crucified, no more!"

"They have swords," another whispered. "They are masters."

Eodan shook his red blade high and yelled in rage: "Is there even one
man among you?"

A moment longer, then a booming from the foul night before him: "Get
these god-rotted irons off me, boy, and you'll have at least two more
hands!"




X


The man who sprang up onto the catwalk and joined Eodan was huge--not
as tall as the Cimbrian, but with a breadth of shoulder that made him
look almost square. His arms, hanging down toward his knees, were
cabled with muscle. His hair and beard were matted filth, but they
still had the color of fire. Small blue eyes crackled under bony brows;
the dented nose dilated, sucking air into a shaggy bow-legged frame
clad only in its chains.

He trumpeted at the darkness: "Hear me! You had courage enough to
kill one stunned man, tossed down to you. Now you've no hope for your
flea-bitten lives but to fight. Whether you touched the overseer or
not, d'you think the Romans would spare a man of us after this? They'll
grind you up for pig-mash! Follow us, beat in a few heads--after all
the beatings you've taken, it's your turn--and we'll have the ship!"

Whirling on Eodan, he said with a wolfish glee, "Come, let's at
'em--the rest will trail us!"

"There's a spear somewhere," said the Cimbrian.

"Ha! I have my chains!" The big man whirled the links still hanging on
his wrists.

Eodan thought of Hwicca, of his son and his father, and of Marius'
triumphal parade. He swung up the ladder.

The crew were gathered nearby on guard. One of them shouted as Eodan's
head emerged and ran forward, holding a pike. Eodan braced himself.
As the metal thrust at him, he caught its shaft and forced it up. He
jerked back while he took the last few rungs. The sailor fell to one
knee. Eodan came out on deck, yanked the pike away and tossed it under
the legs of the two nearest men approaching him. They went down.

"Haw, well cast!" bawled Redbeard.

A man was going up the ladder to the poop deck. Over the heads of
two or three sailors, Eodan saw that he had a bow. "See up there!"
he cried, as he danced back from the Gaul's sword-thrust. Redbeard
grunted, whirled his chain and let fly. The Thracian deckhand screamed
as the staple end smashed across his face, and dropped his ax. The
redbeard picked it up, took aim and threw it. There was a gleam in the
air and a meaty whack. The bowman fell off the ladder, wailing, the ax
standing in his shoulder.

"Back to back," snapped Eodan. The crew were circling him, looking
for a chance to rush in. He counted four--the Gaul, the Greek, the
Pamphylian, and a stocky fellow with a leather apron, belike a
carpenter. The Thracian, who rolled about moaning, and the archer, who
lay bleeding to death, were out of the fight.

And here, from around the cabin, leaving their hot-water kettle, came
Demetrios and Flavius!

Redbeard wrapped a chain about his right hand--the links on his left
he kept dangling--and twirled it. "Hoy, down there in the pit!" he
shouted. "Get off your moldy butts and come crack some bones!"

The Pamphylian and the Greek moved in side by side, facing Eodan.
The first of them leaped about, thrusting lightly with his sword,
not trying to do more than hold the Cimbrian's eyes. Then the Greek
worked in from the left. Eodan's blade clanged against his. At once the
Pamphylian darted close. Eodan could just whip his sword around in time
to wound him and drive him back. It gave the Greek an opening. Eodan
saw that assault from the edge of an eye; he got his cloak-shielded arm
in the way. The Greek struck for his hip, but the thrust only furrowed
Eodan's flesh. Then Redbeard swatted his chain-clad hand around, and
the Greek reeled back. Eodan thrust savagely at the Pamphylian, who
retreated. Redbeard batted the carpenter's pike aside with his right
hand. The chain on his left wrist snapped forth and coiled around the
Pamphylian's neck. Redbeard pulled him close, took him by an arm and
kicked him down the hatch.

"You puking brats!" he roared into the pit, as the sailor fell. "Do I
have to send 'em to you?"

Demetrios and Flavius were among their men now--only the Gaul, the
Greek, and the carpenter! Eodan screamed and shook his sword at them.
"_Hau-hau-hau-hau-hoo!_"

"Form ranks!" barked Flavius.

"Best we get back under the poop," panted Redbeard.

Eodan drifted aft across the deck, growling. Five men left, no more.
But they marched in a line, their timidity gone. Two could not hope to
stop them for long--

The slaves came out.

Not all had so much courage, perhaps ten. But those fell upon the
crew with broken oars, chains, and bare hands. Eodan saw Flavius turn
coolly, lift his sword, and sheathe it in a throat; pull it free and
gouge the next man open. The sailors fell into a ring, the yelping
slaves recoiled.

"_Hau-hau-hee-yi!_" shrieked Eodan, and charged.

It was Flavius' head he wanted, but the Greek's he got. The sailor, his
face puffy from the chain-blow it had taken, stabbed. Eodan went to one
knee and let the point tear his wadded cloak. He thrust upward. Blood
ran from the Greek's thigh, but the man stood firm. Eodan jumped to
his feet, got two hands on the Greek's sword wrist and put his weight
behind them. He heard the arm leave the socket, and the Greek went
down. Eodan saw that the fight had departed this place; the slaves were
clubbing loose. He followed. A rower emerged from below, saw the Greek
and the Thracian lying helpless and battered them to death.

Eodan glimpsed Redbeard across the ship, locked bare-handed with the
carpenter. Those were two strong men. The carpenter broke free and ran,
pursued by Redbeard. Under the forecastle stood a rack of tools. As the
carpenter picked up a hammer, Redbeard smote him with a chain, and the
hammer dropped. Redbeard caught it in midair, roared and struck the
carpenter.

But now the battle had ended. The Gaul had fallen, pounded to ruin.
Only Flavius and the captain still lived. They fought their way aft,
to the poop; half a dozen wounded slaves and three dead lay behind
them. When they stood on the upper deck and defended the way with their
swords, the mutineers fell back.

For a while there was silence. The ship rolled easily, waves clapped
the strakes, wind hummed in the rigging. The hurt men moaned, the dead
men and the wreckage rolled about. But those were not loud noises,
under so high a heaven.

Redbeard went to the foot of the poop and shook his hammer. "Will you
come down, or must I fetch you?" he cried.

"Come if you will," said Flavius. "It would be a service to rid the
earth of Latin as atrocious as yours."

Redbeard hung back, glowering. One by one, the rowers drifted up to
join him. Flavius arched his brows at them and grinned. His hair was
flung disarrayed by the breeze, his tunic was ripped and a bruise
purpled one calf, but he stood as though in Rome's Forum. Beside him,
Demetrios mouthed threats and brandished his blade.

Eodan went to the hatch. He heard the remaining slaves clamor down
there, and a sickness choked him. By the Bull, he thought, if those
creatures have so much as spoken to Hwicca or Phryne, the fish will get
them--cooked!

"Hoy!" he shouted. "Come up, we have won!"

Something stirred on the ladder. And then the sun caught Hwicca's
bright blowing hair. She trod forth, dropping the trident in an
unaware gesture. One leg showed through a rent in her gown. Her broad
snub-nosed face was still bewildered; the blue eyes were hazed, as
though she had not fully awakened.

"Hwicca," croaked Eodan. "Are you hurt?"

"No...."

He flung his sword to the deck and drew her to him. "We have the ship,"
he said. "We are free."

A moment only, her fingers tightened on his arms. Then she pulled away
and looked over the blood-smeared deck. "Flavius?" she whispered.

"Up there." Eodan pointed with a stabbing motion. "We'll soon snatch
him down!"

Hwicca stepped aside. She shivered. "It does not seem real," she said
in a child's high, thin voice.

Phryne's boy-figure emerged. She was holding a dripping dagger. She
looked at it, shook her head, flung it from her and bent shut eyes down
upon clenched fists.

Eodan laid a hand on her shoulder. He had been wild at thinking of harm
to Hwicca; now a strange tenderness rose in him, and he asked very
gently, "What happened, Phryne?"

She raised a blind violet stare. "I killed a man," she said.

"Oh. No more than that?" Thankfulness sang within Eodan.

"It was not so little." She rubbed a wrist across her forehead. "I
think I will have evil dreams for a long time."

"But men are killed daily!"

"He was a slave," said Phryne without tone. "Hwicca and I went among
them. She pulled out the staples, and I guarded her. This one man
shouted and seized her dress. He would have had her down under the
bench. I struck him. I struck him twice in the neck. He slumped back,
but it took him a while to die. A sunbeam came in. I saw that he did
not understand. He was only a man--a young man--what did he know of us?
Of our purpose down there? Of anything but bench and chains and whip
and one niggard piece of sky? And now he is among the shades, and he
will never know!"

She turned away, went to the rail and, stared out at the horizon.

Eodan thought for a moment. He would have given blood of his own to
comfort her, though this seemed only some female craziness. At last:
"Well, do you think it would have been better for him to dishonor the
woman that wanted to free him?"

Phryne paused before answering. "No. That is true. But give me a while
to myself."

Eodan picked up his sword and went to the poop ladder. The slaves
milled about, grumbling. Their bodies were mushroom-colored, and
they blinked in the bright day; they had not been starved, for their
strength was worth money, but sores festered on them and their hair
and beards were crusted. Only the big red man seemed altogether human.
Belike he had not been long at the oars.

He turned about, bobbed his head awkwardly and rumbled: "I lay my life
at your feet. You gave me back myself."

Eodan grinned. "I had small freedom to choose! It was get help or be
cut down."

"Nonetheless, there is fate in you," said Redbeard. He lifted his
hammer between both hands. "I take you for disa--for chieftain. I am
your hound and horse, bow and quiver, son and grandson, until the sky
is broken."

Eodan said, moved to see tears on a giant's face, "Who are you?"

"I am called Tjorr the Sarmatian, _disa_. My folk are the Rukh-Ansa, a
confederation among the Alanic peoples. We dwell on the western side
of the Don River, north of the Azov Sea. I carry _disa_ blood myself,
being a son of the clan chief Beli. The Cimmerian Greeks caught me in
battle a few years ago. I went from hand to hand, being too quick of
temper to make a good slave, until at last they pegged me into this
floating sty. And now you have freed me!" Tjorr blew his nose and wiped
his eyes.

"Well, I am Eodan, Boierik's son, of the Cimbri. We can trade stories
later. How shall we dislodge those two up there?"

"A bow would be easiest," said Tjorr, brightening, "but I'd liefer
throw things at them."

Flavius went to the deck's edge and looked down. "Eodan," he called.
"Will you speak with me?"

The Cimbrian bristled. "What can you say to talk back your life?"

"Only this." Flavius' tone remained cool. "Do you really think to man
a ship with these apes? They know how to row. Can they lay a course,
hold a rudder, set a sail or splice a line? Do you, yourself, even know
where to aim, to reach some certain country? Now Captain Demetrios has
mastered all these arts, and I, who own a small pleasure craft, have
some skill. Eodan, you can kill us if you wish, but then you will be
wrecked in a day!"

There was buzzing among the slaves. The ship heeled sharply, under a
gust, and Eodan felt spray sting his face.

Phryne left the rail and came to him. "I have not seen much of the
sea," she said, "but I fear Flavius is right."

Eodan looked back along the deck, toward Hwicca. She stood watching the
Roman in a way he did not know, save that it was not hate. Eodan raised
his sword until it trembled before his eyes. The blood running down the
blade made the haft slippery. I had no real quarrel with any of the men
whose blood this was, he thought.

Then he regarded the sea, where it curled white on restless greenish
blue, and the sky, and the far dim line that was Italy. He spat on
the planks and called, "Very well! Lay down your arms and be our deck
officers. You shall not be harmed."

"What proof do you have?" snorted Demetrios.

"None, except that he wants to reach land again with his wife," said
Flavius. "Come." He led the way down the ladder. The rowers muttered
obscenity. Two of them moved close, their pieces of oar lifted. Tjorr
waved them back with his sledge. Flavius handed his sword to Eodan, who
pitched it down so it rang.

"I advise you to assert your authority without delay." Flavius folded
his arms and leaned against the poop, amused of face. "You have an
unruly band there."

By now the remaining oarsmen had come on deck. Eodan counted them. All
told, he had sixteen alive, including Tjorr, though several of these
had suffered wounds. He mounted halfway up the ladder. "Hear me!" he
cried.

They moved about, stripping the fallen sailors, shaking weapons they
had taken, chattering in a dozen tongues. Several edged close to
Hwicca. "Hear me!" roared Eodan. Tjorr took Demetrios' helmet and
banged on it with his hammer till ears hurt from the noise. "Heed me
now or I throw you overboard!" shouted Eodan.

When he had them standing, squatting or sitting beneath him, he began
to talk. There was little art of oratory among the Northern folk, but
he knew coldly that he must learn it for himself this day if he wanted
to live.

"I am Eodan who freed you," he said. "I am a Cimbrian. Last year,
having destroyed many Roman armies, we entered Italy. There our luck
turned, we were beaten and I was taken for a slave. But my luck has
turned again, for you see that I captured this ship and struck the
irons off you. And I shall give you your own freedom back!" He played
for a while on the thought of no more manacles or whips, sailing to a
land where they could find homes and wives or start out for their own
countries. When he had them shouting for him--he was astonished how
easy that was--he grew stern.

"A ship without a captain is a ship for the sea to eat. Now I am the
captain. For the good of all, I must be obeyed. For the good of all,
those who do not obey must suffer death or the lash. Hear me! It may
well be needful for you to row again, but you will row as free men. He
who will not pull his oar is not chained; he is welcome to leave us
over the side. He whose gluttony takes more than his ration shall be
cut into fish bait to make up for it. Hear me! I show you two women.
They are mine. I know you have been long without women, but he who
touches them, he who so much as makes a lewd remark to them, will be
nailed to the yardarm. For I am your captain. I am he who will lead you
to freedom and safety. I am the captain!"

A moment's stillness, then Tjorr whooped. And then they all shouted
themselves raw, clapped, danced and held their weapons aloft.
"_Captain, captain!_" Eodan leaned on the ladder while the cheering
beat in his face. Now, he thought drunkenly, now I can forgive Marius
that he made a triumph!

But the ship was bucking, drifting before the wind. While Tjorr went
among the men, binding hurts and learning what skills they might have,
Eodan conferred. Beside him were Hwicca, who held his arm and looked
gravely at him, and Phryne, who stood with feet braced wide against the
roll and fists defiantly on her hips. Demetrios, red with throttled
anger, faced Eodan; Flavius sat on a coil of rope, his chiseled
features gone blank.

"First we must know where to betake us," said Eodan. "I do not think we
could sail unquestioned into Massilia harbor as we are! Could we put in
elsewhere on the shore of Gaul, unseen?"

"It's a tricky coast for a lubber crew," said Demetrios.

"Narbonensis is thickly settled," added Phryne. "Even if we landed in
some cove, I doubt we would get far on foot before some prefect tracked
us down." Her gaze went west, toward the sun. "Indeed, nearly all the
Midworld seacoasts of Europe are Roman."

"There is Africa," said Flavius.

Phryne nodded thoughtfully. It struck Eodan (why had he never noticed
it before, with her hair so short?) that the shape of her head was
beautiful.

"Mauretania," she murmured. "No, that is well west of us. A long way to
go across open sea, with so tiny and awkward a crew. Numidia must be
nearly south ... but so is Carthage, where Romans dwell. Then I hear
Tripolis and Cyrenaica are desert in many places, down to the very
sea--"

Eodan said, "By the Bull, we could sail around Gaul to Jutland!"

Flavius laughed noiselessly. Demetrios rumbled like some fire mountain
before he achieved words: "Would you not rather bore a hole in the
ship? That would be an easier way to drown!"

Phryne smiled at the Cimbrian. "I should have awaited such a plan from
you," she said. "But he is right. It is too long a voyage, and the
Ocean is too rough for the likes of us."

"Well, then," he snapped, "where can we go?"

"I would say toward Egypt." Eodan started; he had not often seen Phryne
redden. She lowered her eyes but went on, hurriedly: "Oh, we could
not sail into Alexandria like any mariners. The King of Egypt has no
more desire to encourage slave revolt than the Roman Senate. But there
should be smaller harbors, or we could run into the Nile delta after
dark, or--It is a world-city, Alexandria, even more than Rome. Let us
once enter it afoot, a few at a time, with just a little money, and
surely we can be better hidden than in the wildest desert. And those
who would go further can find berths with eastbound ships or caravans.
You could go as far as the Cimmerian Bosporus, Eodan, Hwicca, and
thence make your own way north through the barbarian lands to your
home!"

Eodan looked at Demetrios. The captain grunted. "I suppose it might be
done, this time of year," he said. "You'll let me off unhurt, won't you
now? The gods will hate you if you break your word to me."

Flavius said calmly: "Chance abets your scheme, Phryne. This wind is
right for doubling around Sicily."

Eodan whipped his sword up, threw it so it stuck in the bulkhead,
toning, and laughed. "Then we sail!"

He found much to do in the next few hours. He had to organize the crew,
giving duties to all the men; he had to visit the whole ship; he had to
count the stores and guess what ration of moldy hardtack, wormy meat,
sour wine and scummed water could be handed out each day. His crew
elected to sleep below, in the pit; most of them feared sea monsters
would snatch an unconscious man off the deck, a yarn often spun galley
slaves to keep them docile. A cleared space in the forecastle peak
was turned over to Tjorr, Flavius and Demetrios, who must always be
on call. The prisoner-officers would stand watch and watch the whole
journey, supervised by captain or mate. Not trusting himself, Eodan
said Tjorr would guard Flavius.

Having cleaned the decks and gotten rid of the dead--they promised
Neptune a bull when they came ashore, to pay for polluting his
waters--the crew made some shambling attempt to become human. It was
almost a merry scene. Tjorr dragged a forge out on deck; iron roared
as his hammer and chisel struck off men's fetters. Beyond him stood a
black Ethiopian, who hacked off as much hair and beard as shears would
take; a tub of sea water and a sponge waited; and they could put on the
tunics or loincloths of the fallen sailors--shabby indeed, but more
than a benched slave had. And a stewpot bubbled on the hearth forward
of the mast, and an extra dole of wine was there to pour for the gods
or drink oneself. Overhead strained the single square sail, patched and
mildewed but carrying them south from Rome.

A thought reached Eodan. He said, dismayed, "But Phryne, I have not
found any quarters for you!"

She looked at the cabin, then back at him and Hwicca. Sunset burned
yellow behind her slight form. "I can use that canvas shelter up on the
forecastle deck," she said.

"It seems wrong," he muttered. "Without you, I would be dead a hundred
times over ... or still a slave. You should have the cabin, and we--"

"You could not be alone enough in a tent on deck," she said.

He heard Hwicca's breath stumble, but she uttered no word.

The sun went down, somewhere beyond the Pillars of Hercules. The moon,
approaching the full, rose out of Asia. The men yawned their way to
sleep; Eodan overheard one young fellow say it had been a trying day.
Presently only the watch was above decks--a lookout in the bows and one
in the crow's-nest, a steersman and Demetrios on the poop, two standbys
dozing under the taffrail.

Phryne said to Eodan, "Will you not sleep, too?"

"Not till Tjorr relieves me," he said. "Would you trust that captain
man?"

"I can oversee him, and call for help if--"

Eodan's mouth lifted wryly. "Thank you, Phryne. But it is not needful.
Later, perhaps. Now I think we shall watch the moon for a bit."

"Oh." The Greek girl was a whiteness in the night; she seemed very
small within the great ring of the sea. Her head bent. "Oh, I
understand. Good night, Eodan."

"Good night." He watched her go to her tent.

Hwicca stood by the larboard rail. Her hair, loosened, rippled a little
in the wind. He thought he could still see a tinge of its golden hue.
Otherwise the moon turned her to silver and mist; she was not wholly
real. But shadows drew the deep curves of her, where the torn dress
fluttered and streamed. Eodan's temples beat, slow and heavy.

He walked to her, and they stood looking east. The moon dazzled their
eyes and flung a shaken bridge across darkly gleaming waters. There
were not many stars to be seen against its brightness, up in the
violet-blue night. The sea rolled and whispered, the wind thrummed low,
the ship's forefoot hissed and its timbers talked aloud.

"I had not awaited this," said Eodan at last, because she was not going
to speak and he could find no better words. "To gain our own vessel!"

"It seems more of a risk this way," she answered, staring straight
before her. The hands he remembered--how fair was a woman's hand, laid
beside the rough hairy paw of a man!--were clenched on the rail. "It is
my fault. Had I not failed you this noontime--"

"How did the Roman get to the door?" he asked. "You could have called
me, or at least put your sword in him, when he neared it ... could you
not?"

"I tried," she said. "But when he began to move that way, slowly, as if
by mere chance, talking to me all the while--he was so merry, and he
was saying me a verse--I did not want to--" She took her head, her lips
pulled back from her teeth and she said harshly: "Once I attacked him,
were not all our lives forfeit? Was it not to be done only if death
stood certain before us? I waited too long, that is all--I misjudged
and waited too long!"

"You could have warned him not to move further."

"He talked all the time--his verse--I had no chance to--"

"You had no _wish_ to interrupt him!" flared Eodan. "Is that not the
way of it? He was singing you some pretty little lay about your eyes
or your lips, and smiling at you. You would not break the mood with
anything so rude as a warning. Is that not how he used you?"

Her head bent. She slung to the rail and arched her back with the
effort not to scream.

Eodan paced up and down for a time. Somewhere out in the water a
dolphin broached, playing with the moonlight. There was strangely
little wind to feel when you sailed before it, as though the hollow,
murmurous canvas above him had gathered it all in. When he turned his
face aft, he caught only the lightest of warm, wandering airs. It was a
fair night, he thought, a night when the Powers were gentle.

It was a night to lie out with your beloved, as you carried her home.

Eodan said finally, with more weariness than he had thought a man's
bones could bear:

"Oh, yes. I too have learned somewhat of these Southlanders. They are
more skilled and gracious folk than we. They can speak of wisdom,
opening the very heavens as they talk; and their wit is like sunshine
skipping over a swift brook; and their verses sing a heart from its
body; and their hands shape wood and stone so it seems alive; and
love is also a craft to be learned, with a thousand small delights we
heavy-footed Northfolk had not dreamed us. Yes, all this I have seen
for myself, and it was foolish of me to suppose you were blind." He
came back behind her and laid his hands on her waist. "Is it Flavius
then that you care for?"

"I do not know," she whispered.

"But you were never more than a few months' pleasure to him!" cried
Eodan. His voice split across.

"He swore it was otherwise." Her fingers twisted together, her head
wove back and forth as if seeking flight. "I do not know, Eodan--there
is a trolldom laid on me, perhaps--though he said he would raise me
from all darkness of witches and gods, into a sunlight air where only
men dwelt--I do not know!" She tore herself free, whirled about and
faced him. "Can you not understand, Eodan? You are dear to me, but I
care for him, too! And that is why I am dishonored. It is not that I, a
prisoner, lay with him. But I was _his_!"

Eodan let his arms fall. "And you still are?" he asked.

"I told you I do not know." She stared blindly out to sea. "Now you
have heard. Do what you think best."

"You can have the cabin for yourself," he said. He wanted to make it a
gentle tone, but his words clashed flatly.

She fled from him, and he heard the door bang shut upon her.

After a long while he looked skyward, found the North Star and measured
its position against the moonlit wake. As nearly as he could tell, they
were still on course.




XI


The wind held strong, blowing them toward western Sicily with little
work on their own part. Now and again they spoke other ships; this was
a well-trafficked sea. Eodan, whose height and accent could never be
taken for Italian, followed Phryne's advice and told them he was a Gaul
out of Massilia for Apollonia; and then they dipped under the marching
horizon.

That first day passed somehow. Eodan busied himself with Tjorr,
learning what seamanship a surly Demetrios could pass on. He dared
hardly speak to Flavius, but the Roman stayed in the forecastle most of
the time the Cimbrian was on deck. Hwicca kept her cabin, whelmed by
sickness from the roughening sea. It had never before occurred to Eodan
that the ills of the body could be merciful.

"Do you stay with her the voyage," he told Phryne. "I will take the
tent."

She stared at him. He barked, as though to a slave: "Do what I say!"
Her eyes grew blurred, but she nodded.

The crew came on deck, idled in the sun till Tjorr went roaring among
them with instruction in the deckhand arts. He had to knock down a
couple before he got some obedience.

"It were best you keep all the weapons," he said to Eodan.

The Cimbrian nodded. With a dim try at a jest: "Even yours?"

"If you wish," said Tjorr, surprised. He wore a sword at his thick
waist. "But spare me my hammer." Hanging by a thong around one
shoulder, it was an iron-headed mallet, a foot and a half long and some
fifteen pounds in weight.

"Oh, keep your sword," said Eodan. "But what would you with that tool?"

"I found it a good weapon yesterday, though a little too short in
the haft. It needs more strength to wield than a battle-ax--but I
am strong, and it will not warp or break when needed most." Tjorr's
red-furred hand caressed the thing. "And then, we of the Rukh-Ansa are
a horse-loving folk, who honor the smith's trade above all others.
It feels homelike to carry a sledge again. And last, but foremost,
Captain, this hammer broke the chains off me. For that it shall have a
high place in my house on the Don, and I shall offer it sacrifices."

Eodan found himself warming to the Sarmatian. He asked further. The
Alans were only barbarians in the sense of doing without cities and
books: they were a widespread race, many tribes between the Dnieper
and the Volga, who farmed and herded for a living. They bred galloping
warriors, word-crafty bards, skillful artisans; they traded with the
Greeks on the Black Sea and had not only meat and fish and hides to
sell, but cloth and metal shaped by their own hands.

"Times are not what they have been in the lands of Azov," rumbled
Tjorr. "We are getting to be too many for our pastures; a dry year
means a hungry winter. And the Greeks press upon us. It was in a raid
on them that I was captured. Nonetheless, I am of high blood among the
Ansa, and now you are my chief. You shall have a good welcome. I hope
you will remain, but, if not, you shall go where you wish, with gifts
and warriors."

"Let us first get to your Don River," said Eodan. He turned from the
Alan, knowing he hurt him by such curtness. But he could not speak of
hope when Hwicca lay farther from him than Rome from Cimberland.

Could it but be judged by the sword, between him and Flavius! But death
was no remedy, thought Eodan; and that knowledge, which he had not had
before, was bitter within him.

The day and the night passed. He noticed that the crew were beginning
to talk in small groups, on the deck or down in the south. The former
captain jerked a thumb at the sight, as he neared. He thought little of
it.

When he came from his tent next morning to take his watch with
Demetrios, there were cloud banks piled white in the south. The former
captain jerked a thumb at the sight. "There you are," he said. "That
marks Sicily. We'll round Lilybaeum today. Then we'll have to come
about on an east-southeast course. Don't like cutting over open sea
myself, but we can't get lost very bad. Daresay we'll raise Africa
around Cyrenaica, then follow the coast to Egypt."

"And abandon the ship on some unpeopled beach," nodded Eodan.

He saw, of a sudden, that his crew was gathering under the poop. Some
had been on deck already, now others emerged in answer to low-voiced
hails. Only Flavius and the helmsman remained apart. Tjorr unshipped
his hammer, walked to the poop's edge and looked down. The wind tossed
his hair and beard like flame. "What's this?" he said. "What are you
muck-toads up to?"

A very young man, dark and aquiline, not all the eagerness whipped out
of him, waved his hands at the others. "Come, follow me," he said.
"This way. Stick close. We've all decided, now we've all got to stick
together." They shuffled their feet, sheepish under Eodan's chilling
green gaze. A burly man in the rear began to herd them along, slapping
at stragglers. They drifted toward the Cimbrian.

"Well?" said Eodan.

The youth ducked his head. "Master Captain," he began. "I am called
Quintus. I'm from Saguntum in Spain. The men have chosen me, fair and
open, by free vote, to speak for us all."

"And?" Eodan dropped a hand to his sword.

The black eyes were uneasy beneath his, but there was a mongrel courage
in them. "Master Captain," said Quintus, "we're not unmindful of being
freed. Though none of us was asked, and some would not have voted to
desert their posts, if it had been put to the fair democratic test. For
mark you, Master, it wasn't a very merry life, but you got your bread,
and you rested ashore between voyages. Now we can look for nothing but
slow death, the innocent with the guilty, if we're caught."

"I do not intend to be caught," said Eodan.

"Oh, of course not, Master!" The boy washed his hands together,
servilely, and cringed. But he did not leave the spot where he stood.
And behind the silent, shuffling mass, his big confederate held a piece
of broken oar to prod the reluctant into place.

"There is money aboard," said Eodan. "When we come to Egypt and beach
this hulk, we shall divide the coins and go our separate ways. Would
you not rather become a free Alexandrian worker than sit chained to a
bench all your life?"

"Well, now, sir, the free man is often only free to starve. An owner
keeps his slaves fed, at least. Some of us is right unhappy about that.
We don't know how to go about finding work in a strange land. We don't
know the talk nor customs nor anything. The older of us are all too
plainly slaves, with marks of shackle and whip, maybe a brand--and what
have we got to prove we was lawfully freed, if anyone asks? Master
Captain, we have talked about this a long time, and reached a fair
democratic decision, and now we crave you listen to it."

Eodan thought grimly, It is another thing I had not understood, that a
slave need not be pampered to embrace his own slavery.

He said aloud, forcing a grin, "Well, if you want to be chained again,
I can oblige you."

A few men snickered nervously. Quintus shook his head. "You make a
joke, Master. Now let me put it to you square, as man to man. For
we are all free comrades now, thanks to you, Master Captain. But we
are all outlaws, too. None dare go home, unless they come from a far
barbarian land; none of us from civilized parts can ever return, now
can we? But we've got this ship, and we've got arms. There are not
so many of us yet, but with the first success we can have more like
ourselves. And the eastern sea is full of trade; I know those waters
myself. There is also many an island around Greece where nobody ever
comes, to hide on--and many a lesser port we could sail into to spend
our earnings, where no one asks how it was earned--"

"Get to the point, you dithering blubberhead!" said Tjorr. "You want to
turn sea bandits, is that the way of it?"

The Spanish youth shrank back, swayed forward again and chattered:
"Pirates, so, pirates, Master Captain. Free companions of the Midworld
Sea. There's no other hope for us, not really there isn't. If
caught--and many of us would surely be caught, wandering into Egypt by
ourselves--we'll die anyhow. This way, if the gods are kind, we'll not
die at all. Or if we do, we'll have had good times before!"

"Pirates," mumbled the crew. "Pirates. We'll be pirates."

Tjorr leaped down to the main deck so it thudded beneath him. He
walked forward in a red bristle, his hammer aloft. "You fish-eyed
slobberguts!" he roared. "Back to your duty!"

The burly man hefted his broken oar. "Now, Master Mate," he said. "Be
calm. This was voted on--uh--"

"Democratic," supplied Quintus.

"So now a ship is to be a republic?" called Flavius from the poop. "I
wish you joy of your captaincy, Eodan!"

The Cimbrian closed fingers about his sword. He could not feel the
anger that snapped from Tjorr; it seemed of no great importance when
Hwicca had cloven herself from him.

"I do not wish this," he said mildly.

Emboldened, the Spaniard stepped close to him. "Oh, Master Captain,
there was no thought of mutiny," he exclaimed. "Why, we are your best
friends! That was the first thing I said, when we met to talk this
over, the captain is our captain, I said, and--"

"I have better things to do than skulk about these waters."

"But Captain, sir, we'll be your men! We'll do anything you say." The
boy grinned confidently, pressing his words in. "Just treat us like
men, with some rights of our own, is all we ask."

"I'll treat you like an anvil first!" snorted Tjorr. His hammer lifted.

"No, wait." Eodan caught the mate's arm as Quintus scuttled back
squealing. "Let them have their way."

"_Disa!_" said Tjorr with horror. "You'd turn into a louse-bitten
pirate, who could be a king of the Rukh-Ansa?"

"Oh, no. We shall still leave the ship in Egypt, as we planned. But
if they want to take it afterward and go roving, it is no concern of
ours." Eodan bent close, muttering, "Until we do get there, we'll need
a willing crew."

"We'll have one, if you'll let me bang loose a few teeth," said Tjorr.
"I know this breed. Yellow dogs! They'll lick your feet or pull out
your throat, but naught in between."

"It is not my pleasure to fight our own men," said Eodan coldly.

"But--but--Well, so be it, my chief."

Eodan turned back to the others. "I agree thus far. You may have the
vessel after I have disembarked at my goal. Meanwhile, I advise you to
learn better seamanship!"

"But, Master Captain," said Quintus, "we know you and the honored mate
are the best fighters aboard. We want you to lead us."

Eodan shook his head.

"Well--will you lead us against any ships we may happen to find before
you depart?"

Eodan shrugged. "As you like, provided I think it is safe."

"Oh, indeed, Master, indeed!" The boy spun around to face the men,
raising his arms. "Give thanks to the captain!"

"Hoy!" cried Demetrios in dismay. "What about me?"

"You'll do as you're told," said Tjorr.

Demetrios gulped and looked appealingly at Flavius. The Roman smiled,
winked and came down the poop ladder. "Your watch," he said.

After a while Eodan began to regret not following Tjorr's counsel. His
crew had become still more slatternly. Now they would do nothing but
sit about boasting of their future, until he finally kicked them into
sullen labor. Quintus sidled up in the afternoon and proposed that the
weapons be handed out so the men could practice. Eodan told him they
should first practice being sailors. Quintus argued. He would not stop
arguing until Eodan finally knocked him to the deck; then he slouched
off, muttering, to find his big friend.

Toward evening, Hwicca came on deck. She was supported by Phryne, and
her face was pale. Eodan's heart turned over. He went to her and asked,
"Do you feel well, my darling?"

"Better," she said dully. "But so tired."

Phryne, who had not followed their Cimbric, said angrily to Eodan: "She
shivers with cold. _I_ have no warmth to give her!"

He said in the Northern language, "Would you have me stay with you
tonight, Hwicca?"

"As you wish," she said. "You are my husband."

Eodan left her, went to the hearth and struck the cook with his fist
for a bad supper.

Presently Hwicca returned to the cabin. Phryne sought Eodan. Was it
only the sunset that reddened her eyes? She said in a jagged tone, "I
do not know what is wrong between you two. I can only guess. But I will
sleep no more with her."

"You can have the tent back, then," said Eodan bitterly, "and I will
roll a blanket on deck, since it appears we must all be sundered from
each other."

"Before Hades, I wonder now if she may not be right!" yelled Phryne.
She stamped her foot, whipped about and ran to the tent.

She was still wearing the boy's tunic, bare-legged, for there were no
women's garments aboard save Hwicca's dresses, too large for her.
Quintus, squatting by the rail with his friend, the big man called
Narses, stared after the Greek girl and smacked his lips.

Eodan paced the deck in wrath, wondering what unlucky thing he had
done. Well, the night wind take them all! Phryne, who would not help
his wife when she needed help, and Hwicca, who had become a Roman's
whore, and--by the Bull, no, he would not say that of her! If it were
true, the only thing would be to cast her off, and he would not do that.

He raised his hands toward the early stars. "I would pull down the sky
if I could," he said between his teeth. "I would make a balefire for
the world of all the world's gods, and kindle it, and howl while it
burned. And I would tread heaven under my feet, and call up the dead
from their graves to hunt stars with me, till nothing was left but the
night wind!"

No thunderbolt smote him. The ship ran onward, dropping the dark mass
of Sicily astern; the last red clouds in the west smoldered to ash and
then to night; the moon stood forth, insolently cool and fair. Eodan
had no wish to sleep, but he saw that Demetrios was dangerously worn,
so he sent the man aft to rouse Flavius and Tjorr.

"We can hold this course all night, they tell me," he said to the Alan.
"The wind is falling, so we won't go too far. Call me if anything seems
to threaten."

"_Da._" Tjorr's small bush-browed eyes went from Eodan to the closed
cabin door. He shook his head, and the moonlight showed a bemused
compassion on his battered face. "As you will, Captain."

Flavius hung back, well into the shadows. He did not follow Tjorr and
the new watch aft until Eodan had departed.

The Cimbrian rolled himself into his blanket forward of the mast,
so the sail's shadow would keep the moon from his eyes. He sought
sleep, but it would not come. Now and again he heard bare feet slap
the planks, a man on watch or one come from below for some air. It
was warmer tonight than before; his skin prickled. He cursed wearily,
forbade himself to toss about and lay still. If he acted sleep, perhaps
he could draw sleep.

It seemed as though many hours went by. Surely the night was old. He
opened one eye. The same stars, the same moon--it had only been his
thoughts, treading the same barren circle. What use, he thought, was a
kingdom, what use even was freedom, when--

There was scuffling, very faint, up in the bow. Eodan opened both
eyes. Some noise, mice--no, it was heavier. He glanced aft. He could
see Flavius and the helmsman, Tjorr blocky against the Milky Way. They
had seen nothing, heard nothing; indeed it was very faint. Up in the
crow's-nest, the lookout stood gazing into nowhere.

Well, no matter. The bow lookout would have cried any needful alarm.

Eodan sat up. But where was the man in the bow? He remembered dimly
that, yes, the Narses man had traded for that watch about sundown.
Narses' hulking shadow did not show above the forecastle. There was
only Phryne's tent.

With a cold thought of long-necked monsters raiding ships' decks for
their food, Eodan sprang to his feet. Sword out, he glided toward the
forecastle. Up the ladder--The struggle was within the tent.

Eodan howled and lifted its flap. Moonlight splashed Quintus' grinning
face. He knelt on Phryne's arms, one hand over her mouth and the
other on her breast. "No one has to know, my beautiful," he had been
whispering. Narses' knees held her thighs apart; he was just lifting
her tunic.

Eodan struck. He felt his blade grate along a rib. Narses' hands
loosened. He straightened on his knees, plucking at the steel in his
side. Eodan pulled it out, and Narses coughed up blood. Eodan struck
him again, between the jaws, so that it crashed. The sword came out the
back of his neck.

Quintus leaped from the upper deck. "Help!" he wailed. "Help, men,
help!"

Phryne struggled from beneath Narses. Her tunic was drenched black
under the moon with his blood. "Are you harmed?" croaked Eodan out of
horror.

"No," she said in a blind, stunned fashion. "You came soon enough--"
She looked at her dripping garment, and a shudder went through her. She
undid her belt and flung the tunic over the side. "But I would have
bled so much less!" she cried.

"What is it?" bawled Tjorr. "Stand fast!"

The crew boiled from the hatch. Eodan put his foot on Narses' face and
tugged the sword free; it took all his strength. He sprang down to the
main deck. "Where is Quintus from Saguntum?" he roared. "Bind me that
offal before I kill the rest of you!"

They swirled and screamed on deck, blue shadows mingled in the white
relentless moonlight. Tjorr went among the crew, striking with the butt
of his hammer. Eodan saw Quintus huddled up against the poop, hands
raised before his face. "There!" he shouted. "There!"

"Help!" shrieked the boy. "Help me! He has gone mad, shipmates! Hold
off that barbarian!"

It was a while before some sort of calm had been restored. Then Eodan
stood before Quintus and said, "This creature tried to violate a woman.
You have heard the punishment. Nail him up!"

"No, no, no," chattered Quintus, "it isn't so, mates, it isn't so. She
lured us herself, she did, she begged us to come to her--look at her
there, flaunting herself--" Their eyes all went forward, where Phryne
wept as she stood at a water bucket sponging Narses' blood off her
skin--"it's just his jealousy!--this barbarian is a worse tyrant than
overseer ever was. Are you going to stand for this, mates?"

Tjorr tossed his hammer in the air. "That you are," he said, "or feel
my little kissing engine here. Bring us some rope. Up this dog goes!"

By now Flavius and Demetrios had joined the crowded, frightened band.
The Roman stepped forth, raising an arm. Moonlight outlined him white
and clean as some marble god. He said in easy tones:

"Of course I was taken prisoner, so perhaps I've no right to speak.
But I do still think of myself as a shipmate, I'm a sailor, too, for
pleasure, and we're all on this same keel together. So if you would
hear my words--"

"Be still!" said Eodan. "This is nothing worth talking about."

Hwicca came from her cabin. "What is it?" she asked. "What has
happened?"

She looked so young and alone that a Power seized upon Eodan.
Willy-nilly, he must go to reassure her. And meanwhile Flavius waved
an angry Tjorr aside, casually, and went on:

"I understand you turned pirate to escape Rome's crosses. But have you
gained much, when your own captain begins to crucify you, one by one?
Why, this youth was the spokesman of your liberty. Will you listen
to him cry in his agony tomorrow? If so, you will deserve the cross
yourselves. And you will get it! What does the captain care? He is only
going to Egypt. It is nothing to him if he kills one of you outright
and hangs up another to keep you awake with dying groans. So you,
already undermanned, are overcome at your first battle. What of it,
says your captain, safely ashore--"

"Now that's muck-bespattered enough!" growled Tjorr. "One more word
from anybody and I'll spray his brains on deck."

"Hail, free companions of the sea," declaimed Flavius, and stepped
aside.

Phryne left the pail, her body glistened wet as she ran, and when
she caught Eodan's hands her own were like some river nymph's. He
remembered again cool forest becks in the North, when he was small and
the world a wonder. "Eodan," she cried. "You'll not do any such thing!"

"But he would have--"

"He did not succeed. And even if he had, would it restore what I lost?
Eodan, I am the one wronged, and I should give judgment."

He felt himself suddenly exhausted--O great dark Bull, breathe sleep
upon me! He said to her: "Well ... thus did we Cimbri set blood price.
What would you have me do to this animal?"

Phryne looked into the boy's liquid eyes and saw how his thin chest
went up and down, up and down with terror. "Let him go," she said. "He
will not harm me again."

Quintus fell to his knees. "I am your slave, bright goddess of mercy,"
he sobbed.

Eodan snapped, "Had you kept still, I would have let you go wholly
free. You jabber too much. Ten lashes!"

Hwicca's lips thinned. "You are too soft, Eodan," she said. "I would
have put him on the yardarm."

He checked a cruel retort and walked from her.

While the needful work was being done, he heard Flavius speak low by
the rail with a crewman. "It is true--a violently rebelling slave may
not live. However, this case is unusual. I have influence, and of
course it is always possible in case of mutiny ... Hm, shall we say a
few loyal souls had been manumitted beforehand and thus did not come
under the law? Much would depend on the testimony of any Roman citizen."

Eodan thought that trouble was being cooked for him. But he could only
stop such mumbles by cutting out every tongue on board. Fire burn them
all! He would do what he could, and the rest lay with that weird he had
called down upon himself.




XII


In the morning they turned east. The wind had shifted enough to give
them some help, though it was necessary to break out the spare oars and
put ten men back on them. Eodan thought of making Flavius go into the
pit for a while. He glanced at Phryne, who sat pensively looking out
toward Egypt, and decided she would think it an unworthy deed.

Hwicca came out some time close to noon. She had put on a fresh gown
and a blue palla; it set off her sunlight-colored braids. She looked
out over the sea, which glittered blue and green in a hundred hues,
foamed, cried out and snorted under a sky of pale crystal. The wind
whooped over the world's rim and drew blood to her cheeks. Eodan had
not seen her so fair since they crossed the Alpine snows.

He went to her and said, striving to be calm, "I hope you feel yourself
again."

"Oh, yes. I am used to the movement now." Hwicca smiled at him, shy as
a child, and he remembered that she was after all no more than eighteen
winters. "Indeed this is a lovely way of faring, as if we rode on a
great bird."

Hope kindled him. He rubbed his chin weightily--let him not urge
himself too fast--and answered: "Yes, I could become as much a
shipwright as a horse tamer, I think. When we return to the North, we
shall begin making some real ships. I only remember boats from my
boyhood. Already I think I could teach their builders some new arts."

Her pleasure faded a little. "Are you indeed bound to return to
Cimberland?" she asked.

"If not to the same place, somewhere near," he said. "I remember my
father speaking of tribes not far eastward, Goths and Sueones, strong
wealthy folk who speak a tongue we could understand. But I would at
least be among my own folk again."

She lowered her face and murmured, "They have a saying here, that
nothing human is alien to them."

"Would you liefer stay in Rome?" he asked, stabbed.

"Let us not talk of that," she begged. Her hand stole up to his chin,
bristly after the past few unshaven days. When she touched him, it
seemed almost pain. "You look so funny," she smiled. "Black hair and
yellow whiskers."

"Hm, thanks," he said, gripping his temper tight. "Since the dye will
linger, Phryne told me, I'd best shave myself."

"How did it happen Phryne came with you?" asked Hwicca, a little too
lightly.

"She attended a matron at the farm, Flavius' wife. We came to know each
other."

"How well?" Hwicca arched her brows.

"She is my friend," he fumbled. "Nothing else."

"Cordelia is a bitch," said Hwicca, flushed, "but her maids have an
easy enough life. What drove this Phryne to forsake it?"

Eodan bridled. "She wanted freedom for herself. She has a man's soul."

"Oh," purred Hwicca. "One of those."

He said in a rage, "You learned too much filth in Rome. I'll speak to
you again when you have curbed your tongue."

He left her staring after him and went forward. "Heat me some water!"
he barked. The cook, a deckhand told off to this task among all others,
gave him a surly glance and obeyed. Eodan crouched by the hearth with
a mirror and scraped the stubble off his face. He cut himself several
times.

When he walked aft again, he saw that Flavius had come from the
forecastle and stood where he himself had been, talking to Hwicca. Her
face was bent from Eodan, but he saw woe in her twining hands. The
Roman did not smile this time; he spoke gravely.

Eodan clapped a wild hand to his sword haft. By all the hounds on
hellroad! No. It was beneath him. If she chose to betray him with a
greasy Southlander, let her--and wolves eat them both.

When he looked again he saw that Hwicca had gone back inside. Flavius
stood looking out to sea. The eagle face was unreadable; then it
firmed and his fist struck the rail. Thereupon Flavius went quickly to
the poop, where Quintus of Saguntum squatted on standby duty with a
red-streaked back. Those two fell into talk.

The day passed. There were many ships. Now and again a man asked the
captain if they should not take one. Eodan dismissed the question with
scorn--this galley was armed, that one in plain sight of two others....
The man would go off muttering. Tjorr said nothing, but took the
carpenter's tools and worked on a boarding plank.

Toward sundown, Phryne, who had spent the day making herself a
dress from some man-garments--no easy task with only a sail-maker's
equipment--came to get her food. She found Eodan standing alone,
chewing a heel of bread and watching two or three crewmen whisper
beneath the mast. "We must be far from land now," she remarked.

He nodded. "Far enough so we might safely attack some lone ship."

"Would you indeed fall upon men who never harmed you, to steal their
goods?" she asked. It was not deeply reproachful, but he felt he must
justify himself to her and thought he was belike the first Cimbrian
that ever saw robbery as anything but a simple fact of life.

"I would welcome a fight," he said. Then, feeling he had shown too
much, he made his tones cool: "If nothing else, the money we could gain
will help mightily in Egypt. And, if you dislike the idea, we need not
slaughter any captives--and we would be setting the galley slaves free."

"Then I suppose it is no worse than any other war," she said. But she
left him.

And the night passed.

In the morning, Eodan saw that Flavius was again talking to Hwicca.
She showed more life than the last time--by all cruel gods, but she
was fair!--and once mirth crossed her face. He stayed in the poop with
Demetrios until his watch ended.

There had been nothing to see but water for many hours. The wind
dropped till the sail hung half empty; the creaking oars rubbed men's
nerves. As noon passed it grew hotter, until the crew shed their
clothes. Eodan kept his tunic. Hwicca came from her cabin and sat in
its shade, alone, but he did not go to her.

The sun was so brazen off the sea that the other galley had come well
over the horizon before the lookout cried its presence. It was also
eastbound. Eodan grew tense. "Stand by to come about!" he said.

"Row down there, you clotheads!" bellowed Tjorr. "You may be rowing to
your fortunes!"

Eodan took the steering oar himself. It was maddeningly slow, the way
they crept over miles. He thought, once, that if he built himself a
galley in the North it would not be so heavy and round as these--yes,
open decks, so a man could pull his oar beneath the sky....

"She's a big one," said Demetrios. "Too big for the likes of you."
Sweat glistened on his nose; his eyes rolled in unease.

Eodan felt the old captain was right. The ship he neared had half
again the length of his, and its freeboard towered over his deck.
Nonetheless, it had no ram, no war engines at all that he could see,
though he only knew such by description. And he had eaten too much rage
the last few days. It must out somehow.

"We will go nearer," he said. "We have decided nothing yet."

"We'll decide to slink off again, that's what we'll do," muttered
Quintus, down on the main deck. "A coward as well as a tyrant, that's
our skipper."

One or two nodded furtively.

Still they edged closer. The captain of the other galley hailed: "Ho,
there! This is the _Bona Dea_ of Puteoli, bound for Miletus with a
cargo of wine! Who are you?"

Eodan repeated his old lie. "Well," replied the stranger, "give us some
sea room, then."

"I sail where I please!" yelled Eodan.

"Come closer and I'll think you're a pirate."

"Think what you want!"

The ships converged. Eodan waited, coldly, until he heard the alarms
and the running feet. Then he gave a crewman the steering oar, ran to
the shrouds and swarmed to the crow's-nest. He was high enough and
close enough now to look down upon the other deck. He counted the
sailors as they scurried about getting their weapons from the captain.
Fifteen. And, with himself, this one still carried sixteen!

Of course, that meant he would have to arm all his rowers, but--He
threw a leg around the mast and slid down, shouting, "_Hau-hau-hau!_
Break out the blades!"

The men on deck roared. Tjorr had to knock one over-eager rower back
down the hatch before the oars would move again. Eodan called two men
to him, pointing out Flavius and Demetrios. "Bind them," he said.

Flavius held out his wrists. "Are you afraid we two will attack your
gang from the rear?" he asked mildly.

"I would not trust you with the women," said Eodan. He slipped
Demetrios' helmet pad on his head. The helmet itself followed. O wild
war-gods, he bore a helmet once more!

"Over here!" cried Tjorr. "This way, you moth-eaten monkeys!" The
deck planks grated beneath the heavy, grapneled boarding plank he had
fashioned.

Spears gleamed along the other ship's rail. Its captain stood in
plumed helmet and polished breastplate, laughing down at the handful
on Eodan's deck. "So you had a slave mutiny, did you?" he said. "Well,
come on, come on! We'll put you to work here, on your way to the arena!"

Eodan looked bleakly over his few, and thought of the ten oarsmen
beneath his feet. They were not the stuff of a good fighting force. See
that skinny graybeard snivel over there--this pirating had never been
any idea of his. Narses was the best of a bad lot, and Narses lay on
the sea bottom. Well, Eodan and Tjorr had to do what they could, for
it was too late now. Even if they turned tail, the other galley would
pursue, and it had more rowers.

He saw Hwicca and Phryne by the cabin. They held each other's hands,
unspeaking, in that mystery of woe whose initiates are all womankind.
He strode to them, buckling on his helmet. "Stay behind that door," he
said. "If the fight goes against us, you must do what seems best."

He looked into Hwicca's eyes, and a smile he had not known was within
his strength crossed face and soul. "But it will be well," he said in
their own tongue. "You were ever my luck."

She lifted a fist and bit her knuckles, and Phryne led her into the
cabin.

Eodan went below with an armful of weapons. He cried into the grunting,
clashing, sweating gloom: "Here is what you asked me for. If you would
stay alive, do not disobey me. Remain at your oars until I blow my
trumpet. Then pull them in, lest they break your ribs when we strike!
And come up and fight!"

No use to wonder if his scummy followers had even understood. He sped
back up the ladder, shield on arm and sword in hand. The _Bona Dea_
loomed like a cliff above him. He saw sunlight blink on shields and
blades up on her deck.

Tjorr had spiked the boarding plank to the deck. It was elevated by
two men with ropes, its claws poised to grab. Tjorr held his hammer
up as he gauged the distance. "Now!" he shouted, and swung the mallet
down. The two men let go, and Eodan sounded Demetrios' trumpet. The
plank fell as their bow slashed across the other galley's oars. Wood
crackled; a pirate looked at a foot-long splinter hurled into his thigh
and wailed. The grapple struck. Its sharpened iron bit deep. The two
ships shuddered to a halt.

"_Hau!_" yelled Eodan, and went up the plank.

Two shields glided into place before him and locked. From behind the
men, two pikes reached after his guts. Eodan shoved one spear aside
with his own shield. The other withdrew, poised and probed in again. He
battered at it with his sword. For one black instant he knew there was
no way for him to get past.

"Beware, _disa_!"

Eodan heard the angry bee-buzz and ducked his head. Tjorr's whirling
hammer was released. It struck a face behind one of the shields. The
shield went down, its man upon it.

Eodan sprang between the two spears, into the gap. Over the rail! He
stood upon the fallen man and thrust at a pike wielder. The sailor,
with no metal to ward his belly, fell backward to escape. Eodan stabbed
his mate. The other shield-bearer turned and attacked from the right.
Tjorr reached around Eodan and put a sword in the man's neck.

Then Eodan and Tjorr were back to back upon the high deck, holding
off the crew. A tall blond man, a German of some kind, ran at Eodan
with a longsword uplifted. "I want that blade!" said the Cimbrian.
He fell to one knee, holding the shield over his head. The German's
glaive smashed down on it. Eodan cut at the German's legs, and the man
staggered back. Eodan got up again and battered loose. It was no way to
use a shortsword. The German limped out of reach and swung his great
weapon up for a cleaving. Eodan raised his own, faster, and threw it.
The German sat down, holding death in himself. Eodan darted forward,
snatched up the longsword and came back to Tjorr.

The Alan, shieldless, had picked up his hammer again. He smote
right-handed with it, a ringing and belling and sundering, while his
left wielded his Roman blade. "Ha!" he bellowed down the boarding
plank. "Are you never coming? Must I do all the work here?"

His crew hung back, seeing how whetted steel flashed around those two
and blood dripped into the sea. Eodan shrieked at them over the din:
"If we lose this fight, you will all go to Rome!"

A man down there hefted an ax, set his teeth and ran up the plank. The
others poured after him. Quintus alone remained, with a spear. When two
of the former slaves turned back, he grinned and prodded them. Only
when all his shipmates were caught up in the battle did he himself come.

Eodan, looking over a wall of helmets, considered the youth's face. By
the Bull, he had just made himself second mate!

Their line split, the galley's crew surged away in clumps of men. The
pirates yelped about, rushed in and out, broke past the defenders here
or were hurled back there. Eodan struck down a man with a disabling
blow--it was good to have a sword he really understood--and looked over
the combat. It was fiercest near the mast. "There we must go, Tjorr,"
he said.

"Aye." The Alan trotted after him. They faced shields and edges. A few
near-naked pirates yammered and waved their weapons, careful to stay
beyond reach. "Follow me, you dogs!" cried Eodan. His sword whined
and thundered. An Italian sailor thrust at him from behind a shield.
Eodan slewed his iron around and cut the man's wrist. The metal was too
blunted already to cut deep, but the bones cracked. The Italian bayed
his anguish and dropped from the line. Eodan slashed at the legs of the
man beside him. That one stumbled, fell and rolled from the pursuing
sword. Tjorr stepped into the widening gap and struck with his hammer.
The pirates, heartened, moved in. The defensive force broke up into
single men.

Panting, Eodan swung himself into the shrouds. There were more wounded
and slain among the ill-equipped pirates than among the merchant crew;
nonetheless, fighting stayed brisk, since neither side knew how matters
stood. Eodan put the trumpet to his lips and blew. Again and again he
blew, until much of the battle died. An arrow grazed his arm, another
thunked in his shield, but he stayed where he was and shouted:

"Hear me! Lay down your arms and your lives shall be spared. You will
be set free without ransom. May Jupiter or someone strike me dead if I
lie! Hear me!"

After he had harangued them a while, a shaken voice called: "How do we
know you will do this, if we yield?"

"You know it will be to the death if you don't!" said Eodan. "Lay down
your arms and live!"

As he returned to the deck, he heard the fight resume uncertainly.
Neither side pressed too hard, now that a truce might be close. Eodan
saw the graybearded pirate cutting the throat of a wounded man, in the
shelter of a bollard. The oldster shrank back from him, afraid. Eodan
said: "Throw that knife against my shield, as noisily as you can, and
cry that you surrender to the freebooter captain."

The fellow obeyed, given a kick to add urgency to his recital. A moment
afterward, Eodan heard from across the deck: "Stop, I yield me!"

It spread like a plague. Within minutes, a disarmed crew huddled
gloomily under the pikes of a few crowing pirates.

Eodan took off his helmet and wiped reddened hands on a fallen man's
cloak. His tunic was plastered to him with sweat. It came as a dull
surprise that the blood painting him was not his own. Just a few
scratches and bruises. Well, the Powers which took all else from him
gave him victory in war, a miser's payment.... He looked at the sun
above the yardarm. The battle had lasted perhaps an hour. And now he
held two ships.

He walked over planks grisly with the dead and the hurt. There were
more of the latter, there always were, but many of them would die,
too, from bleeding or inflammation. The still air quivered with their
groans. He counted up. Besides himself and Tjorr, eight pirates were
hale. Eleven merchant crewmen stood on their feet; but their captain
had quit the world bravely. "This should cool our lads off," said the
Cimbrian. "I scarcely think they will want to try piracy again."

"They can raise their numbers, _disa_," Tjorr reminded him. "There must
be forty slaves below decks, at least."

"True--indeed--Well, so be it. If we can come to Egypt, I care not."
Eodan looked glumly down the boarding plank to the smaller craft. "I am
sick of blood. Can you set matters to rights here?"

"_Da._ I'll try not to bother you." The redbeard's look was so gentle
that Eodan wondered how much he understood--surely not a great deal; it
was growing upon Eodan what a reach of darkness each human soul holds
for all others.

He returned to the lesser galley and cut the bonds of Flavius and
Demetrios. "You can go look about," he said listlessly.

Flavius stood up. He searched Eodan's face for a long while. "It was
badly done of the fates not to make you a Roman," he said at last, and
left. Demetrios followed him.

Eodan sighed and went to the cabin. Hwicca and Phryne stood there. The
Cimbrian girl was flushed; her breast rose and fell and she ran forward
to take his hands. "I thought I saw all our folk come back in you!" she
cried.

Eodan looked across her shoulder at Phryne, who stood white in the
doorway. "I begin to grasp your meaning," he said with a crooked smile.
"This was no more unjust than any other war."

"Would you wash yourself?" asked the Greek girl.

He nodded. "That, and sleep."

Hwicca stepped back, her face hurt and bewildered. Eodan went past her
into the cabin. Phryne brought him a sponge and a bucket of salt water.
He cleansed himself and lay down on one of the mattresses. Sleep came
like a blow....

He woke suddenly. Lamplight met his eyes. The air had cooled, and the
ship was rocking. He heard singing and the stamp of feet, but remotely.
He sat up.

Hwicca sat beside him. Her hair was loose, rushing over her shoulders
so he did not at first see she wore her best gown. She hugged her knees
and regarded him with troubled eyes.

"Is it night?" he asked in the Cimbric.

"Yes," she answered, very quietly. "Tjorr said not to waken you. He
said he had brought order on the new ship. They released the slaves and
locked up the crewmen and such of the rowers as did not want to join
us. He got the wounded below decks over there--and everything--" She
held out a leather bottle. "He said to give you this."

Eodan ignored it. He stepped to the door and glanced out. The grappling
plank was taken down, and only ropes and a single lashed gangway joined
the two vessels; the hulls rocked enough to break any stiff bridge. It
was dark and empty on this ship. Torches flared on the other, bobbing
in a crazy dance, hoarse voices chanted and laughter went raw under a
sky of reborn wind and hurried clouds.

"What is that foolishness?" he snapped.

Hwicca came to stand at his side and look, almost frightened, at the
Tartarus-view. A naked black outline, hair and beard one mane, capered
against fire-glow. You could just glimpse a circle of others, leaping
and kicking with hands joined around the ship's hearth.

"There was wine on board," said Hwicca.

"Oh ... oh, yes. I remember now. And Tjorr let them have the cargo?"

"He told me he could not stop them. It seemed best to grant them this
night's drinking. Then tomorrow we could all take the big galley--"

"And let the crew of that one have this. Hm. It is not such a bad
thought."

"You would let them go?" asked Hwicca, astonished.

"I gave them my word," he said. "And what good would it do to kill
them?"

He closed the door again, muffling the racket. He picked up the leather
bottle and drank thirstily. "Ah! But did they also have some food fit
to eat on that ship?"

"I do not know. I prepared what I could from the stores here." Hwicca
pointed to a bowl of stew. "I fear it got cold while you slept."

Eodan lowered the bottle. The roof was so low his head had to bow down
to hers. "Why are you here?" he asked.

"You should not sleep unguarded." She touched the knife in her girdle.
His longsword lay drawn by the wall. He realized that he was unclothed.

"Phryne could have guarded me," he said.

Hwicca reddened. "Is Phryne your wife?"

"Are you?"

She gasped and turned her back. "Well, I will go!" she cried. "If you
do not wish me here, I will go!"

"Halt!" he said as she caught at the door's bolt. She stopped as though
speared and turned about until she stood against the door facing him.
Tears whipped down her face, and the breath rattled in her throat.

Eodan felt inwardly gouged, but he stalked to her and took her by the
shoulders. "I have had enough of this," he said. "Tonight you shall
decide who your man is."

"I told you I do not know!" she screamed.

Eodan slipped his hands down over her arms until he had her wrists.
"You shall decide," he repeated. "And you are going to choose me."

She tried to pull free, but he dragged her to him and laid his mouth
upon hers. She writhed her face away. He held her, one-handed about the
waist, while his free hand drew her knife and stabbed it into the wall.
Then he grasped her hair and forced her lips back where he wanted them.

Suddenly she shivered. He let her go, and she sank to her knees,
holding his. He sat down and laid an arm about her waist. She came to
him, weeping and laughing. "It is you," she said. "It is you, Eodan."

Long afterward, when the lamp had gone out of itself, she whispered, "I
think it must always, really, have been you."




XIII


When Phryne saw Hwicca go in to her husband and close the door behind,
she felt this ship would be no place for anyone else tonight. Let her
board the other one, then. She made sure that the dagger was safe in
her girdle, then climbed the grappling plank.

It surged and chattered on the newly won decks. Tjorr stood huge,
bawling out his orders. They had begun to release the slaves; one after
another shambled into the sunlight and blinked with dull eyes. Phryne
went to the Sarmatian. "Can I be of help?" she asked.

"Ha? Oh, it's you, little one. Best you keep out of harm's way. We've
much to do before sunset."

"I told you I want to help, you oaf," she snapped.

Tjorr scratched in his ruddy beard. "I don't know what with. I'll not
let you scrub the planks nor cook a meal. Sets a bad example, you know,
we have to be officer class now. And otherwise--"

"_Aqua, aqua._" Croaking came from the pitch-bubbling deck as though
men had become frogs.

Phryne looked at one who was trying feebly to stanch blood from a half
severed arm. She felt more than a little ill, but she wetted her lips
and said, "I know something about the care of hurts. Let me see to the
wounded."

"Waste of time," said Tjorr. "If they're not too badly cut, a swathe
of rags and maybe a few stitches will save 'em. The rest it would be
kinder to throw overboard."

Phryne answered slowly: "Some woman bore each of these beneath her
heart once. Let me do what I can."

"As you wish. Find a place down below. I'll tell off a couple of men to
bear them thither for you."

In the time that followed, Phryne had horror to do. Twice she
stopped--once to cast up at a certain sight and once to change
her blood-stiffened gown for a tunic. It was hot and foul in the
'tween-decks space; the groaning and gasping seemed to fill her cosmos.
Her temper began to slip--having held the hand of one youth and smiled
on him, as the only lullaby she could give while he died, she heard a
man screaming as though in childbirth, and, seeing he had a mere broken
finger, she chased him out at dagger point. Otherwise it was to wash
and bandage, cut and sew and swaddle, set and splint and fetch water,
with no more help than a ship's carpenter from Galilee or some such
dusty place.

She came out at last, unable to do more--now Aesculapius and Hermes
Psychopompos must divide the souls as they would--and saw the sun low
above a sea growing choppy. Its rays touched ragged mare's-tails that
flew from the west; wind piped on the rigging. She shivered as that
air flowed across her bare legs and arms, but made her way over a deck
strange in its orderliness. Tjorr was looking down into an open cargo
hatch.

He turned and grinned at her through tossing fiery whiskers. "We found
our way into the hold," he said, "and you'd not believe this hulk could
carry so much wine and stay afloat. The lads will mutiny if we don't
feast tonight, and I can't say I blame 'em!"

Phryne gave the sky an unsure look. "Is that wise?"

"Oh--the weather, you mean? It'll blow a bit, but nothing that need
worry us. Riding to sea anchors we'll not go far, and Demetrios says
there are no places to run aground hereabouts. You look wearied enough.
Go call Eodan, and we'll all have a stoup."

"He is with his wife," she said.

"Hm? Oh. Oh, I see. Well, I'll just go knock at their door with a
bottle, and then they can do as they please." Tjorr's small eyes went
up and down the slender shape before him. He grinned. "I don't suppose
you'd be pleased to do likewise?"

She shook her head, unoffended.

"Well, I only thought I'd ask. Best stay in earshot of me tonight,
though. Not all the men are so honorable as me."

"I would wash now, and have fresh raiment," said Phryne.

"Aye. Go in the cabin there. I'll have someone draw a tubful for you."

Phryne entered the captain's room, finding it better furnished than
that of the smaller galley. Man's dress again, she sighed to herself,
opening a clothes chest. Well, here was an outsize cloak; with the help
of a brooch and belt it could almost reach her ankles, as a sort of
gown.

"Hail," said a voice in the door.

Phryne stepped back with a stab of terror. Master Flavius looked at
her. He carried a bucket in either hand.

"I think it amused the redbeard to have me wait on you," he said. His
mouth quirked. "He has not heard that Rome has festivals every year
wherein the Roman serves his own household slaves."

"But I am no more a slave!" said Phryne, as much to herself as to him.
She had seen little of this man; she was bought in his absence and
served his wife, whom he avoided. But he was a master, and no decent
person would--But I have gone beyond decency, she thought; beyond
civilization, at least. I am outlaw not only in Rome but in Rome's
mother Hellas.

The knowledge was a desolation.

Flavius poured the water into a tub screwed to the floor. It slapped
about with the rocking of the ship. He glanced at her, sideways.
Finally he said, with a tone of smothered merriment, in flawless Greek:
"My dear, you will always be a slave. Do you think because that white
skin was never branded your soul escaped?"

"My fathers were free men in their own city when yours were Etruscan
vassals!" she cried, stamping her foot in anger.

Flavius shrugged. "Indeed. But we are neither of us our fathers." His
voice became deep, and he regarded her levelly. "I say to you, though,
the slave-brand is on you. It was burned in with ... fair words on fine
parchment; white columns against a summer sky; a bronze-beaked ship
seen over blue waters; grave men with clean bodies and Plato on their
tongues; a marching legion, where a thousand boots smite the earth as
one; a lyre and a song, a jest and a kiss, among blowing roses. Oh,
if the gods I do not believe in are cruel enough to grant your wish,
you could give your body to some North-dweller--you could learn his
hog-language and pick the lice from his hair and bear him another
squalling brat every year, till they bury you toothless at forty years
of age in a peat bog where it always rains. That could happen. But your
soul would forever be chained by the Midworld Sea."

She said, shaking, "If you twist words about thus, then you, too, are a
slave."

"Of course," he said quietly. "There are no free and unfree; we are all
whirled on our way like dead leaves, from an unlikely beginning to a
ludicrous end. I do not speak to you now, the sounds that come from my
mouth are made by chance, flickering within the bounds of causation and
natural law. Truly, we are all slaves. The sole difference lies between
the noble and the ignoble."

He folded his arms and leaned back against the jamb. "What you have
done proves you are of the noble," he said. "I would manumit you if we
came back to Rome--give the Senate some perjured story, if need be, to
save you from the law. I would give you money and a house of your own
in Greece."

"Are you trying to bribe me?" she flared.

"Perhaps. But that comes later. What I have just offered is a free
gift, whether you stand by the Cimbrian or not, provided only of course
that we both get back to Rome somehow. It will be a thing I do of
my own accord, because we are the same kind, you and I, and it is a
cursedly lonely breed of animal."

His grin flashed. "Now, to be sure, if you would like to help assure--"

She drew her knife. "Get out!" she screamed.

Flavius raised his brows, but left. Phryne slammed the door after him.
A while she smote her hands together. Then, viciously, she tore off her
tunic and washed herself.

Wrapped in the mantle, she emerged again. She felt calmer--on the
surface; underneath was a dark clamor in an unknown language. Sundown
blazed among restless clouds; the mast swayed back and forth in heaven.
Tjorr sat on a barrel under the forecastle, drumming his heels as he
raised a stolen chalice. Elsewhere men crowded shrieking about lashed
casks, and the deck that had been bloodied was now stained purple.
Phryne shivered and drew the wool closer about her. This was going to
be a night where Circe reigned.

She looked aft. A small cluster of men stood together around Flavius'
tall form. She recognized Demetrios, the youth Quintus, two or three
others. Briefly, she was afraid. But--a few unarmed malcontents? she
asked herself scornfully.

She walked forward. A locked hatch cover muffled some weird
noises--what was that? Oh, to be sure, the free crew and the more timid
slaves of this galley had been chained to the rowers' benches down
there.

Tjorr boomed at her, "Hoy, shield maiden! Come drink with me! You've
earned it!"

Phryne joined him. One man snatched after her. Tjorr tossed his hammer,
casually. The man screamed and hopped about, clutching his bare toes.
"Next one insults my girl gets it in the brisket," said Tjorr without
rancor. "Now bring me back that maul."

Phryne accepted the cup he sloshed into the barrel for her. She held it
two-handed, bracing herself against the ship's long swinging. Barbarous
to drink it undiluted, she thought; but fresh water was too begrudged
at sea. She looked at the hairy, squatting shapes that ringed her in
and asked, "Will there not be fights that disable men we need?"

Tjorr pointed to a chest behind the barrel. "All arms save our own are
in there," he said. "And here I'll sit all night. I'm not unaware of
that Flavius cockroach, little one. Were I the chief, he'd have been
fish food long ago."

"Is your life so much more to you than your honor?" she bridled.

"Well, I suppose not. But I've three small sons at home. The youngest
was just starting to walk on his little bandy legs when I went off. And
then there's my woman, too, if she's not wed another by now, and--Well,
anyhow, it would be bitter to die without drinking of the Don again."
Tjorr tossed off his cup and dipped it in once more.

"Where would you yourself go?" he asked.

Phryne stared eastward, where night came striding into the wind. "I do
not know," she said.

"Hm? But surely--you spoke of Egypt--"

"It may be. Perhaps in Alexandria.... Leave me alone!" Phryne went from
him, up the ladder and into the bow.

She huddled there a long time. No one ventured past Tjorr; she could be
by herself. Down on the main deck the scene grew more wild and noisy
each hour; by torch and hearth-light she glimpsed revels as though Pan
the terrible had put to sea. One small corner of civilization remained,
far aft below the poop, where Flavius and his comrades warmed their
hands over a brazier and drank so slowly she was not certain they drank
at all.

The moon seemed to fly through heaven, pale among great driving clouds.
It showed fleetingly how the waters surged from the west--not very high
as yet, but with foam on black waves. And the wind droned louder than
before.

Phryne sat under the bulwarks and nursed her beaker, letting the wine
warm her only a little. This was no time to flee her trouble. She must
choose a road.

And what was there for her?

Briefly, when they had planned where to go on their newly won ship,
it had flamed up--perhaps Antinous was in Alexandria, perhaps she
could find him again! Too long had he kissed her only in dreams. She
hearkened back to the last time when she awoke crying his name.... She
knew, then, suddenly, that she had not really seen his face in the
dream. She had not done so for months. She could not even call it to
mind now--it was a blur; he had had a straight nose and gray eyes and
so on, but she only remembered the _words_.

Well, Time devoured all things at last, but it might have spared the
ghost she bore of Antinous.

Nevertheless, she thought, she could stay in Alexandria.... No, what
hope had a woman without friends? There were only the brothels; better
to seek the sea's decency this very night. She could follow Eodan
toward his barbarian goal, most likely to his death along the way, but
suppose they did get back to this Cimberland, what then? Eodan would
house her, but she would not be a useless leech on any man. And so she
would merely exist, alone on the marches of the world, until finally in
her need she let some brainless red youth tumble her in his hut.

She wondered drearily if Flavius had meant his offer. It was the best
of an evil bargain. And if he lied--well, then she would die, and the
shades did not remember this earth.

When Eodan released Flavius, she would go with him to Rome.

The decision brought peace, after so many hours of treading the same
round like a blinded ox grinding wheat. Perhaps now she could sleep.
It was very late. The revelry had ended. By the light of a sinking
moon, glimpsed through clouds, she saw men sprawled across the deck,
their cups and their bodies rolling with the ship. A few feeble voices
hiccoughed some last song, but, mostly, they were all snoring to match
the wind. Phryne stood up, stiff-limbed, to seek her tent on the
smaller galley.

The brazier under the poop was still aglow. A dark figure crossed in
front of it, and another and another. Flavius' party was retiring, too.
Being sober, they would have the sense to go below to sleep. One of
them had just entered the poop....

No, what was it he came back with? Torchlight shimmered on iron. A
crowbar from the carpenter's kit? And there were hammers, a drawknife,
even a saw. O father Zeus, weapons!

Flavius led them across the deck. The last half-dozen celebrants,
seated in a ring about a wine cask, looked up. "Well," Phryne heard,
"who 'at? c'mere, old frien', c'mere f' little drink--"

Flavius struck coldly with his bar. Two hammers beat as one, _thock,
thock_--like butchers, the three men stunned those who sat. Quintus
cackled gleefully and began to saw a throat across. "No need!" snapped
Flavius. "This way!"

Phryne threw herself to the planks. What if they had seen her? Her
heart beat so wildly she feared it would burst. As though from
immensely far off, she heard Flavius break the lock on the hatch and go
below.

Phryne caught her lip in her teeth to hold it steady. She could just
see one man standing guard on deck while the others were breaking off
chains in the rowers' pit. Could he see her in turn, if she--but if she
lay still, he would find her at sunrise!

Phryne inched to the ladder. Down, now. Moonlight fell on Tjorr,
sprawled back against the weapon chest. His mouth was open and he was
making private thunder in his nose. Phryne crouched beside him. He was
too massive; her hands would not shake him enough. "Tjorr! Tjorr, it is
mutiny!" she whispered. "Tjorr, wake up!"

"What's that?" A ragged, half-frightened cry from the guard. Phryne saw
him against the sky, peering about.

"Uh," mumbled Tjorr. He swatted at her and rolled over.

Phryne drew her knife. The guard shaded his eyes, staring forward. "Is
somebody awake there?" he called.

She put her mouth to the Alan's ear. "Wake, wake," she whispered. "You
sleep yourself into Hades."

A man's head rose over the hatch coaming. "Somebody's astir up there,"
chattered the sentry.

"We'll go see," said the man. His burst-off chains swung from his
wrists; it was the last mutiny all over again. How the gods must be
laughing! Another followed him. Phryne recognized Quintus' ferret body.

"Ummmm," said Tjorr and resumed his snoring.

Phryne put her dagger point on a buttock and pushed.

"_Draush-ni-tchaka-belog!_" The Sarmatian came to his feet with a howl.
"What muck-swilling misbegotten son of--Oh!" His gaze wobbled to rest
on the man running toward him. The hammer seemed to leap into his hand.

"Up!" he bawled. "Up and fight!"

Phryne dashed past him. Eodan still slept, she thought wildly; they
could fall upon him unawares and kill him in his wife's arms. Behind
her she heard a sound like a melon splitting open. "_Yuk-hai-saa-saa!_"
chanted Tjorr. "You're next, Quintus!"

The youth ran back, almost parallel to Phryne. Men were coming from the
hatch, one after the other. He saw her and shrilled: "Get that one
too! It's--" He broke off, swerved and plunged toward her in silence.

Phryne put her foot on the gangway between the ships. It jerked back
and forth as they rolled, and she heard ropes rubbing together. She
must go all-fours over it or risk being thrown into the water between
the hulls. She crouched.

A hand closed on her ankle. She felt herself being yanked back on deck.
Moonlight speared through darkness as she sat up. Quintus stood over
her, grasping his saw. "Lie there," he said. "Lie there or I'll take
your head off!"

Phryne whipped to her knees and stabbed at his foot. He danced aside,
laughing. The saw blade reached across her arm. It was no deep cut, but
she cried out and dropped her knife. He kicked it away, grabbed her
shoulder and hurled her onto her back. Kneeling beside her, he laid the
saw teeth across her throat. "Be still, now, if you would live," he
said. "I've business to finish with you."

Phryne looked into the downy face. She lifted her arms. "Oh," she said.
"I am conquered."

Quintus' chin dropped. Moving carefully, so he could see what she did,
she unfastened her belt. "I have never known a man like you," she
breathed. "Let me get this mantle off--" She slid her hands toward the
brooch at her throat. The fabric wrinkled up ahead of her arm.

"Quickly!" gasped the boy. He lifted the saw a little, it was shaking
so much, and fumbled at his loincloth.

Phryne got the bundled cloak between her throat and the teeth. She
stabbed him in the hand with her brooch pin. He yelled, the saw
skittered from his grasp. She leaped up and onto the gangway.

Quintus yammered by the rail. A fury lifted in Phryne; she stood up
in the moonlight on the bobbing, twisting plank and opened her arms.
"Well," she cried, "are you man enough to follow?"

He stumbled onto the gangway. She kicked, and he fell down between the
hulls. They were protected by rope bumpers from grinding together, but
one lurching wall struck him as he went past. He rebounded, splashed
and did not rise again.

Phryne crawled over the plank. Great Mother of Mercy, she thought, what
had she done? But now it was to rouse Eodan. Up on the other ship,
Tjorr stabbed and hammered, crying to his drunken followers to waken.
Twenty men pressed in upon the Sarmatian, driving him back by sheer
weight from the weapon chest.

Phryne beat on the cabin door. "Eodan, Hwicca, come out!" she called.
"Come out before they kill you!"

It opened. The Cimbrian stood tall against blackness, armed only with a
yard-long sword. Behind him Hwicca still blinked sleep from her eyes.
Even in that moment, Phryne saw how fulfillment had made her beautiful.

Iron clanged in the windy moonlight. Phryne's breath choked. So they
had the weapons now! Flavius was already worming over the gangplank,
bearing sword and shield. Behind him came two more--the rest still
raged among the befuddled pirates, it was a bestial battle--one with an
ax and one with a spear. Phryne and the Cimbrians were naked.

Eodan sprang forward to meet Flavius before he crossed. The Roman stood
up and pounced the last few feet. He could have been thrown into the
sea, like Quintus, but the watery gods let him pass. He struck the
deck, danced away from Eodan's slash and smiled.

"Come," he said, "let us end this Iliad."

Eodan snarled and moved in. He had more reach, which his blade
immensely lengthened. But Flavius' shield seemed always to be where the
Cimbrian blows landed--over his head, in front of his breast, even down
to his knees. The battle banged and roared between those two.

Phryne and Hwicca faced the Roman's companions. The men grinned and
walked in at their leisure. Phryne tried to dart aside, but the
spearman thrust his shaft between her legs. She fell, and her mind
seemed to burst. When she regained herself, she was prodded erect.
"Over there," said the man. "Stand against the cabin wall. That's the
way." He held his pike close to her breasts, ready to drive it home.

Hwicca, a long knife in her hand, circled about with the axman. She
spat at him, wildcatlike. Once she tried to rush in with a stab, but
his weapon yelled down and she saved herself by falling. He tried to
strike again, but she got away too swiftly.

And Eodan and Flavius fought across the deck and back, sword on
shield, the Roman boring in behind his shelter and the Cimbrian holding
him off with sheer battering force.

A bloody, tattered giant loomed over the rail of the other galley.
Tjorr sheathed his sword in one final man, who tumbled down between the
hulls. The Alan jumped onto the gangway.

The man who was guarding Phryne saw him coming. "I must deal with him,"
he said, not unkindly. "Farewell, girl. We'll meet beyond the Styx." He
drew back his pike. Phryne had no more will or strength to dodge. She
waited.

Tjorr stopped on the middle of the gangplank, braced his legs and
whirled the hammer. Phryne did not see it fly; she only saw the
pikeman's eyes bulge out, and when he toppled she saw his head broken
open. Her knees deserted her; she sank to the deck and stared emptily
at all else.

Tjorr bounded down, fell upon the axman from behind and wrenched the
weapon loose. The axman kicked with a shod foot. Tjorr bellowed wrath
and pain, dropped the ax and was caught in a wrestler's grip. He and
the sailor went down on the deck like a pair of dogs.

Hwicca sped toward Eodan. She called out something--Phryne did not know
the rough word, but surely no voice had ever held more love. As Eodan's
gaze shifted toward her, Flavius stepped in close and brought the upper
edge of his shield beneath Eodan's jaw. The Cimbrian lurched back, and
his sword clattered from his hand. He leaned his back against the rail
and shook his head like a stunned bull.

Flavius poised his blade. Hwicca flung herself across Eodan's body--and
the sword struck home.

Flavius stared stupidly as she went to her knees. Eodan caught her and
eased her to the deck. He did not seem aware of the Roman any longer.

Tjorr broke his opponent's neck, picked up the fallen ax and thundered
toward Flavius. The Roman bounded away, up onto the gangplank. He
reached the other ship and faced back; but he was masked by shadow.

Tjorr paused at the plank's foot, saw spears bristle and stayed where
he was. His ax chopped and the plank's ropes parted. Now it dangled
free from the higher bulwark. Tjorr ran along the rail, cleaving lines.
A few arrows fell near him as he cranked the anchor windlass. The gale
caught the two ships and drove them apart.

Tjorr came back to Phryne. "If we set our canvas we can run away from
'em while they kill the last pirates," he croaked. "I see no other
chance. Do you think you and I can unfurl the sail alone?"




XIV


Arpad of Trapezus, who had served ably on the warships of the King,
was rewarded with a pleasant commission--to carry an ambassador and
certain dispatches to Egypt. He took a lean black penteconter and a
picked crew, not only to impress on his master's behalf but to return
with men not hopelessly slack after a few weeks in the subtle stews
of Alexandria. They passed the Bosporus with no trouble, Byzantium
having recently become subject to the Kingdom of Pontus. There was a
halt at the Hellespont to show diplomatic passports, for that strait
was controlled by the Bithynians, who favored Rome. But since Rome was
still uneasily at peace with the Pontines, who dominated the Black Sea,
Arpad was obsequiously sent on his way.

Thereafter he bore south between the Aegean islands, pausing here
and there to admire some temple crowning a high ridge, until he saw
pirate-haunted Crete. Beyond lay open sea, but it was not excessively
far to the Nile's mouths.

The Pharaoh of Egypt, who was a Macedonian by ancestry, received
the captain from Pontus, who was half Persian and half Anatolian,
graciously. Like all cultivated people, they spoke together in Attic
Greek. During his stay Arpad found himself much in demand among
the learned class; this city swarmed with as many philosophers and
geographers as it did with gods and prostitutes. Pontus itself was
exotic enough for several evenings' discussion--Graeco-Persian-Asiatic
on the Black Sea coast, a source of timber, minerals and the
fantastically lovely murrhine glass. And one had heard of its king,
the great Mithradates, enthroned in his twelfth year, forced to flee
the usurping schemes of mother and brother, living for years a hunter
in the mountains, until he returned to wrest back his heritage. But
this Mithradates Eupator had not been satisfied with one throne--no,
it seemed he must have all the Orient. He skirmished and intrigued
among the Cappadocians, Galatians, Armenians, until no neighbor king
sat easy. He fought his way up the eastern coast and took Colchis of
the Golden Fleece for his own. He hurled back the wild Scythians in the
north so that the Greeks of the Cimmerian Bosporus acknowledged their
rescuer as their overlord. That kingdom lay near the dark edge of the
world, on a peninsula thrusting past Lake Maeotis or the Azov Sea or
whatever it was called. Northward was only barbarism till you reached
the night and glaciers of Ultima Thule! What could the excellent
Captain Arpad tell us of his lord's Tauric provinces? Did Colchis hold
any relics of Jason's visit? Did he think war with Rome, which now held
much of Asia's Aegean coast and looked greedily east, would be to the
death; or would it be a civilized war where boundaries were adjusted
and prisoners taken for the slave market?

Thus Arpad's stay became delightful, and he left with regret. But it
was now early summer, and soon the etesian winds would make eastward
sea traffic all but impossible.

By some quirk--by the ill wind of Ahriman, mumbled his sailors--they
encountered a powerful west wind, a veritable gale. It blew steadily,
hour upon hour and day upon day; as they wallowed north on bare poles
and oars, striving to hold course and not be blown clear to Syria, the
skies turned to an unseasonable overcast with chill gusts of rain. When
at last he recognized the island of Rhodes, smoky blue through the
squalls, Arpad decided to put in and wait out this weather.

Beating through rain and spindrift, he saw another galley. It had a
sail up, recklessly, no oars out at all, the ports shuttered.... Arpad
steered closer. That fool of a captain would smash himself on the beach!

Something about the stranger's unruly course told him it was badly
undermanned. It had an Italian look, not much of a galley, an old
trading scow but even so--Arpad sent a man up to speak with the lookout
in the crow's-nest. Only three crewfolk were seen on the other deck.
Two of them fought their yardarm, trying to pull it about so they would
not be blown so directly toward the island. The third stood by a
lashed steering oar. The ship was sluggish, low in the water, now and
then a wave breaking over the side; it was slowly foundering.

Arpad considered various matters, such as the rescue of distressed
mariners and the salvage rights on their vessel. "Stand by to board!"
he called.

Even in these high seas, a naval crew had small trouble laying
alongside and grappling fast. An armed party surrounded the three and
conducted them aboard the Pontine galley. Arpad had them led to his
cabin, where they stood dripping on a carpet while he removed his own
wet cloak. Only then did he regard them closely.

They stood with a sort of exhausted defiance between four drawn swords.
The lamp, swinging from its chains, revealed them clad in rags. But
they were no ordinary sailors. There was a burly redbearded fellow, his
broad battered face speaking of Sarmatian plains. There was a young
woman whose figure would have been good, in the skinny Greek manner,
had she not lost so much weight; her hair was cut like a boy's and
her hands were bloodied from ropes and levers. The strangest was a
barbarian with yellow hair dyed a fading black and a sun symbol etched
on his brow. He looked like a wild king, and yet he stood gloomily
withdrawn as any desert eremite, showing no interest in who had taken
him or what his fate would be.

The backs of both men had been whipped; the red one bore permanent
manacle scars. Slaves, then. And doubtless the woman was, too. Their
captured weapons had been laid at Arpad's feet--a rusty longsword, an
ax and an iron-headed maul.

"Do you speak Greek?" asked Arpad. His Latin was limited.

"I do," said the girl. Her eyes--you didn't see violet eyes very often,
and especially not with such long sooty lashes; really, it was her best
feature--were hollow from weariness and wide from anxiety, but she
looked on him without wavering. "What ship is this, and who are you?"

"What a way for fugitive slaves to address a Pontine noble!" exclaimed
Arpad lightly. "Down on your knees and beg for your lives; that would
be more in keeping."

"These men are not slaves," she said. "They are chieftains returning
home."

"And you? Come, now, do not anger me. When a ship is found with only
three slaves aboard, I can guess the tale for myself. Tell me your
names and how it all came to be."

She said with a pride at which her exhaustion dragged: "I am merely
Phryne, but I stand between Eodan of Cimberland and Tjorr of the
Rukh-Ansa."

"I know _them_!" said Arpad.

"It is a long story. They were war prisoners, who regained their
freedom by conquering the Roman crew--and even I have heard the King of
Pontus is no friend to Rome, so is he not a friend to Rome's enemies?
But the upshot was that we three alone remained on this vessel. We
could do little more than set sail and run before the wind, hoping to
strike a land, Crete or Cyprus or wherever the gods willed, whence we
might make our way to Cimmeria. But we found two men and one woman
cannot even keep a ship bailed out in such weather." She smiled
tiredly. "We were debating whether to try and make landfall on that
island ahead, risking shipwreck and capture if it is Roman-held, or
steer past--if we could. Now you have changed the situation, Master
Captain, and we throw ourselves upon your hospitality."

"What slave may claim hospitality?" asked Arpad. "And when he has
mutinied, probably murdered, as well.... Would you feel bound to
consider a wolf your guest?" He stroked his chin. The ship, he
calculated, would surely be considered salvaged by him; the Rhodesian
authorities had to have their share, but he would get something. If he
did not dispute possession of the two men--the port governor could put
them to work, or kill them, or give them to the Romans, whatever the
law said--then the governor in turn would doubtless ignore the girl.
There was a good mind under that tip-tilted face, and a hot spirit
in that small thin body; she would make the rest of this voyage most
interesting to Captain Arpad, and he could get a fair price at home
after he had fattened her up enough for the Oriental taste.

Her pale, wet cheeks had darkened as he spoke, more with anger than
fear. She rattled off a few harsh Latin words. The Alan growled and
looked about. A guard's sword pricked his hairy flank; he would never
cross the two yards to Arpad's throat. He said something to the tall
blank-faced man, who shrugged. Mithras! Didn't that one care at all?
Well, men did go crazy sometimes when the fetters were clinched.

Arpad listened more closely, interested. He heard the redbeard: "But
Eodan, _disa_, they'll flay us!"

"Then thus the Powers will it," said the tall one in a dead voice.

The girl, Phryne, stamped her foot and shouted:

"I thought I followed a man! I see now it is a child! You sit like a
wooden toad and will not stir a hand, even for your comrades--"

A wan wrath flickered in the cold green eyes. The one called Eodan
said: "You lie. I worked my share during these past few days, to keep
the ship afloat. If I did not care whether we sank or not, that is my
concern."

She put her fists on her hips, glared up at him and said: "But you make
it the world's concern! I understood you had suffered loss when Hwicca
fell. Do you think I cannot imagine it, how it would be for me, too,
did the one I cared for die in my arms? I said nothing when you made a
raft for her, though we needed your help even that first day; when you
laid her on it with the Roman sword and her dagger, though we needed
both; when you drenched it with oil that might have nourished us; when
you risked your own life to launch it and set the torch to it; and when
you howled while it fell burning behind. A man must obey his own inward
law, or be no man at all. But since then? I tell you, it has ceased
to be your private mourning. Now you call upon the world and all the
gods, by your silence and your indifference, to witness how _you_ are
suffering!

"You overgrown brat! If you want to sacrifice your comrades to her
ghost, do it with your hands like a man!"

Arpad signaled his guards. "Take them out and give them food and dry
garments," he said. "Bind the men and bring the girl back to me."

A hand closed on Eodan's shoulder. He pushed it off, impatiently, and
made a huge stride toward the captain. His lean face was taut with fury.

"Do you dare treat a Cimbrian like a slave?" he said.

"_Hoy!_" The guards closed in. Eodan's fist jumped out. One man lurched
back with a smashed mouth. Another circled, unsure. Tjorr growled and
reached for the hammer on the floor. The remaining two men forced him
away, but had no help to spare with Eodan.

A hand gripped Arpad's tunic so he choked. The long head bent down
toward his. "You little spitlicker," said Eodan, "I do not know whether
to string you to the mast myself or ask your king to do it for me. But
I think I shall let him have the pleasure."

Arpad shuddered and gestured his guards back, for he had seen monarchs
enough, and there was no mistaking the royal manner. A king born did
not act as if it were possible men could fail to knock their heads on
the ground before his boots. Eodan stood unarmed, nearly naked, and
shook him back and forth very slowly, in time with the words:

"Now hearken. I am Boierik's son of the Cimbri. I have a quarrel with
the gods, who have treated me ill, but it does not change who I am. I
have been searching for a king to hear a message I bear. Since your
vessel chanced to pick me up, I will speak first to your ruler. Obey me
well, and perhaps I shall forgive you for what you said in ignorance.
So!"

He threw Arpad to the floor. The guardsmen stepped in, hemming him
between shields and lifted blades. They glanced at their captain. Arpad
stood up.

One could never be sure.... If that big man was mad, then he might
be the walking voice of--of anything ... or else, there were so many
outlandish tribes, a prince of one might easily have been captured
and--and truly great Mithradates would be interested to meet such a
person, as he was interested in all the realms of earth. The king might
even bestow favor on this Eodan, some of which might then reflect
on Arpad. Or perhaps the king would have Eodan beheaded; but that
annoyance would surely not be considered Arpad's fault, since Arpad had
only brought this visitor in the hope of amusing the king. It was not
too great a risk. And, if the tall one demanded treatment as a guest
meanwhile, it was not unduly inconvenient, the ambassador's cabin stood
empty....

"My master, the sublime one who knows all nations, must decide this,"
purred Arpad. His Latin was always equal to titles. "We shall seek his
august presence."




XV


The south coast of the Black Sea was good to look upon, where red
cliffs and green valleys and their many streams met wine-dark waters;
high overhead went summer clouds, blinding white, and thunder spoke
from the Caucasus. Sinope lay on a small peninsula about halfway
between Byzantium and Colchis. It was an ancient Greek colony, now
become the chief seat of the Pontine kings.

Eodan stood in the bow with Phryne and Tjorr, watching the city grow
as they entered its harbor, until the first loveliness of marble
colonnades and many-colored gardens yielded to a tarry workaday bustle
where the surface was crowded with galleys from half the East. He was
well clothed in white linen tunic, blue chlamys, leather belt and
sandals, the German sword polished and whetted at his waist. They had
even shaved him so he could look civilized and worked the dye from his
hair so he could look foreign. He wondered how that would affect his
price, if Mithradates judged against him.

"Tjorr," he said, "since your folk have clashed with these before now,
are you not in danger of his wrath? I have been wondering if it would
not be wiser for you to stay aboard here until--"

The Alan, clad like his chief but still doggedly shaggy-faced, answered
with a boy's eagerness: "From what I've heard, he is not one of those
sour Romans. Why, if he has any honor at all, he will send me home
laden with gifts, just because our raids kept his soldiers amused." He
laid a hand on the hammer slung at his side. "Nor do I think anything
can go too badly wrong while I bear this. Did we not win a ship, strike
off our fetters, thwart our enemies, get pulled from the sea god's
mouth and have a well-fed passage here, while I bore the Smasher?
There's luck in this iron."

Eodan thought of Hwicca and his lips tightened. "It may be," he said.
"Though I am unsure what that word luck means."

She had ceased to haunt him. First had been all those days when her
face on the balefire came between his eyes and the world, though it
had not been her, that cold white face, it was _dead_--but where then
had she wandered? He would sleep for a little and wake up; a few times
he woke so happily and looked about for her before remembering she was
dead. But since Phryne called him to anger, with the biting unjustness
of her words, he had been more nearly himself. There was a goal again,
the beech forests of the North, with sunlight snared in their crowns
and a lark far and far up overhead--yes, he wanted to go back and
search for his childhood, but home-coming was not what it had been in
his thoughts. Hwicca would not be with him.

Well, a man sometimes lived when they cut off a hand or a leg or a
hope; he fumbled on as best he could, and what he had lost hurt him on
rainy nights.

Eodan shut off the awareness and turned to Phryne. "Are you certain you
will not speak for us?" he asked. "Our tale is so strange already that
it will add small strangeness for a woman to argue on our behalf. And
you have more knowledge of this realm, and a quicker wit."

The girl smiled faintly and shook her head. She wore a white dress
Arpad had gotten her, and a palla with the hood drawn up. That covered
her shortened hair and made a discreet shade across her face; here in
the East a woman was regarded as being much less than a man, so this
garb would please by its modesty.

"I have already told you the small amount I know, and you have been
clever to draw much else from the captain," she said. "Nor does it
matter greatly. The knowledge we shall need is how to deal with men,
and there, Eodan, you are showing more inborn gifts than any other
person I have met."

He shrugged, a little puzzled as to her meaning, and watched the
harbor. Small boats crawled about the galley's oars, tub-shaped
coracles whose paddlers screamed their wares of fruit, wine, sausage,
cheese, guidance among the brothels and other delicacies. The people
of Sinope were a mixed lot. Most were dark, stocky, curly-headed,
big-nosed and hairy, but not all. On the wharfs Eodan could see
Armenian mountaineers with shepherds' staffs and crooked knives, a
sleek Byzantine merchant, a gaily-robed warrior of pure Gallic strain,
a pair of hobnailed Macedonian mercenaries, a spear-bearing man, in fur
cap and white blouse and baggy trousers tucked into his boots, whom
Tjorr said delightedly was an Alanic tribesman, a graybearded Jew, a
lean Arab--this was not Rome, this Sinope, but it pulled in its share
of the earth's people!

They docked, and Arpad led his guests--or prisoners--ashore with an
escort of soldiers. Since this was an official ship, they stopped for
no formalities of bribing the customs agents. A messenger ran ahead of
them, and they had not reached the palace when he came back to say the
king would receive them at once.

Eodan went between the shields of marching men, through the city gates
and a cobbled street of flat-roofed buildings shrieking with bazaars,
where the escort clubbed a way, and at last up a hill to the palace.
Heavy-armored men, with helmet and cuirass, greaves and shield, sword
and spear, tramped up and down upon its walls like a moving arsenal;
here and there squatted lightly clad archers holding the short Asiatic
hornbow. Beneath posed a guard of Persian cavalry, tall arrogant
hook-faced men, their helmets and horses magnificent with plumes, blue
cloaks fluttering about scaly coats of mail, trousered legs ending in
boots of silver-inlaid leather, lance in hand, ax and bow and small
round shield at the saddle--"By the thunder-snake itself," muttered
Tjorr, "how I'd love to sack their barracks!"

A trumpeter preceded them through bronze gates. They went over a path
beside which roses flared and Grecian nymphs leaped marble out of
secret bowers; they saw a fountain shaped like Hercules and the hydra,
so skillfully modeled and painted that Eodan grabbed for his sword;
then the stairway opened before them, with sphinxes crouched at the
foot, bulls at the head and two polished soldiers rigid on every step.
There Arpad's escort was told to wait. The captain himself and his
three guests surrendered their weapons to the watch.

"Not this," protested Tjorr, holding his hammer. "It is my luck."

"A god, did you say?" asked the Latin-speaking guard who wanted it. He
looked at his officer, unsure; there were so many gods, and some of
them were touchy.

The officer shook his head. "No lesser god enters the Presence of
Mithras, who is always with the king. Leave it here, fellow, you'll get
it back."

"But--"

"Do as he says," Eodan broke in.

Tjorr loosed the thong, his face miserable. "I tell you, my luck is in
that hammer. Well, maybe your triskele will see us through."

"Would you keep the king waiting?" puffed Arpad.

He led the way, his best robe rippling about him, up the stairs and
under the red and blue columns of the portico. Slaves prostrated
themselves at the doors: once only, since the king received three such
salutes. They were conducted down halls of lifelike murals; Eodan saw
with a thrill how often the Bull recurred, sacrificed by a youth or
shaking great horns beneath a golden sun-disc. Lamps in silver chains
gave a clear unwavering light. But, when finally the carpeted ways
opened on an audience chamber, the sun himself came through a great
glazed window behind the throne.

It was so bright that Eodan could hardly see the man upon that carven
seat, except as a robe of Tyrian purple and a golden chaplet. He and
his companions were held back by the door. Arpad advanced alone,
between grave men--long-haired, sometimes bearded--in brilliant
garments. Among them stood a few outland envoys; a turban or a shaven
pig-tailed skull betokened foreignness. Around the room, motionless
between soaring porphyry columns, were a guard of spearmen.

A long time passed while King Mithradates read the dispatches handed
him, questioned Arpad more closely and dictated to his secretary. Eodan
could not hear what was said, the courtiers made so much noise as they
circulated and chattered. It would be in Greek or Persian, anyhow.

But finally the chamberlain called out something. A hush fell bit by
bit, and Eodan saw eyes turn his way. He walked forward. Tjorr and
Phryne came behind him; it had been arranged thus at her advice. At the
ritual distance from the throne, Eodan halted. Tjorr and Phryne made
obeisance, thrice knocking their heads on the carpet and then remaining
crouched. Eodan merely bowed his head once upon folded hands.

He heard a sigh go around the room, like the wind before a hailstorm.

Raising his eyes, he locked gaze with Mithradates Eupator. The King of
Pontus was a giant, tall as Eodan and broad as Tjorr, his hands ropy
with veins and sinew like any hunts-man's. Within a mane of curly dark
hair and bearded jawline, his head was nearly Greek--a wide brow, gray
eyes, straight nose, rounded shaven chin; it lifted straight from the
pillar of his throat. He was only in his mid-thirties, Phryne said, but
he owned half this eastern sea, and Rome itself feared he might take
all Asia.

"Do you not bow to the throne?" he asked, almost mildly. His Latin came
as easily as any Senator's.

"My Lord," said Eodan, "I beg forgiveness if I, a stranger, have
unknowingly offended. I gave to you that sign of respect we have in the
North, when one of royal blood meets a greater king."

He had made it up himself the day before, but no one had to know that.
He hazarded a cruel death--far safer to proclaim himself dust beneath
the royal feet--but as one more humble suppliant among thousands he
could not have hoped for much.

Mithradates leaned back and rubbed his chin. Curious, thought Eodan
in a far part of his being, the king's nails are blue at the base....
"My captain told me what little you would say to him," murmured the
Pontine. "I trust you will be more frank with me."

"Great King," said Eodan, "I have so little to bring you I am ashamed.
May you live forever! All the world lays its wealth in your hands. I
can but offer the salvage price of my ship, paid at Rhodes, which Arpad
insists is his. I leave to your judgment, Wise One, whether the monies
do indeed belong to him, or to me who would give them as an offering
to Your Majesty. But one gift at least I bring, if you will accept
it--my story, what I have done since leaving my own realm, and what I
have seen from Thule to Rhodes and from Dacia to Spain. Since this tale
is my gift to you, I did not think it fit that Arpad, your servant,
should have its maidenhead."

Mithradates opened his mouth and bellowed with laughter.

"Well, your gift is accepted," he said at last, "and I shall not be
miserly myself if the tale be rich. From what country are you?"

"Cimberland, Great King."

"I have heard somewhat of the Cimbri. Indeed, one of my neighbors
sent them an embassy a few years ago. Surely this will be a night's
entertainment, though you humble my pride by making me hear it in
Latin. Chamberlain! See to it that these three are given a suite,
changes of raiment and whatever else they require." Mithradates said
it in the Roman tongue, doubtless for Eodan's benefit, since he must
repeat it in Greek. "Go, I will see you at the evening meal. And now,
Arpad, about those monies."

"Great King of All the World," wailed Arpad, flat on his belly, "may
your children people the earth! It was but that I, your most unworthy
subject, thought to offer you--"

As he went to the guest chambers, Eodan asked the slave who led him--an
Italian, he saw with glee--what the king had meant, that he was ashamed
to hear the tale in Latin. "Know, Master," said the boy, "that our
puissant lord keeps no interpreters on his own staff, for he himself
speaks no fewer than two and twenty languages. You must indeed have
come from far away."

The suite was as luxurious as one might have expected. Phryne said
doubtfully, "We build our hopes on Vesuvius. The soil there is
surpassingly rich, but sometimes the mountain buries it in fire. I will
be happy if we can get from here unscathed."

"Why," said Eodan, surprised, "I would have thought you could dwell
here more gladly than any place else in the world. They are a mannered
folk, it seems."

"They are more alien to me, a Greek, than the Romans--or the
Sarmatians--or the Cimbri." She looked out the window, down to gardens
where paths twisted so a man could lose his way. "If we stay long
enough, you will understand."

"It may be. Nonetheless, I have a feeling no few arts could be learned
here that might take root in the North." Eodan went over to her.
"Though one of the greatest could be taught me by yourself."

She turned about with an eagerness that astonished him. "What do you
mean?" Her face flushed, and she lifted her hands like a small girl.

"I mean this craft of writing. Not that we would have much use for it
in the North ... and yet, who knows?"

"Oh." She looked away again. "Writing. Indeed. I will teach you when
the chance comes. It is not hard."

Near sundown, an obsequious eunuch informed them they would soon dine.
They left Phryne to a solitary meal--women did not eat before the
king--and followed him to a lesser feasting hall.

Music sounded from a twilight peristyle--flute, lyre, drum, gong,
sistrum, and other instruments Eodan had not heard, yowling like
cats. The diners, arrayed in their silks and fine linens, gold and
silver and jewels, lay about a long table on couches, in somewhat the
Grecian manner. Mithradates came last, to trumpets, and all but Eodan
prostrated themselves.

There was silence. A slave brought forth a cup and knelt to offer it to
the king. Mithradates looked over his half-hundred guests. "Tonight I
drink hemlock, in memory of Socrates." A kind of unvoiced whisper ran
about the assembly as he drained the beaker.

"Now," he said, "let the feast begin!"

Eodan, who was hungry, paid little heed to the succession of artificed
viands. Cordelia had offered him enough of that; let a man be nourished
on rye and beef, with a horn of ale to wash it down. He took enough
mutton to fill himself and barely tasted the rest. For the hour or
so in which they ate--this was no elaborate banquet, only the king's
evening meal--no person spoke. Eodan did not miss the talk, and the
music he ignored. The dancers were another matter. He studied the
acrobatic boys closely; this or that trick could be useful in combat.
When the supple women came out with dessert and dropped one filmy
garment after the next as they swayed about, he knew his hurts were
scarring over. He would have traded all these for Hwicca--yes, all
women who lived--but since she was gone and they were here....

Finally, with some decorum restored, there was general conversation.
Mithradates talked impatiently to various self-important persons,
dismissed them at last with plain relief and roared the length of the
table: "Cimbrian! Now let us hear that tale you promised!"

Eodan followed his beckoning arm, to lie beside the king himself.
Envious eyes trailed him. Not everyone listened--the whole room buzzed
with talk--but he was as glad of that. He had not wished to make the
Cimbrian destiny a night's idle amusement; but to this gray-eyed man,
himself a warrior, it was fitting to relate what Boierik had done.

Now and again Mithradates broke in with a question. "Is it true that
sky and sea run into one up there, as Pytheas has written?... How high
does the sun stand at midsummer?... Do they know of any poisons? This
is a self-preserving interest of mine--too many kings have died of a
subtle drink. I take a little each day, so that now they cannot harm
me, neither hemlock nor arsenicum nor nightshade nor--But continue."

The lamps burned low; slaves stole about filling them with fresh oil.
Eodan's throat hoarsened; he drank one cup of wine after another,
until his head buzzed like all summer's bees in a clover meadow in
Jutland.... Mithradates matched him, goblet for goblet, though the
king's was larger, and showed no sign of it.

And at last Eodan said: "Then your ship found us and brought us hither.
So it may be the gods have ended their feud with me."

"That Ahriman has," corrected Mithradates, "but he is the common enemy
of all men and--Could it be, I wonder, that the Bull in whose sign you
wandered the world was the same that bleeds upon the altars of the
Mystery? But enough." His hand cracked down on Eodan's shoulder, and he
raised his cup, clashing it against the Cimbrian's. "What a journey!"
he cried. "What a journey!"

"I thank Your Majesty. But it has not ended yet."

"Are you certain?" Mithradates looked at him, with gravity falling like
a veil. "I wonder if you are not too much a man to be flung back on any
northward wind. Would you like to fight Rome?"

Eodan answered harshly, "There is blood of my blood on their hands. I
count it defeat that I shall not meet the man Flavius again. I will set
up a horse skull in the North and curse him, but it is not enough."

"Your chance could come," said Mithradates. "There will be war between
Rome and Pontus. Not yet, not for some years, but it is brewing, and it
will be pitiless. I shall need good officers."

"I have not the skills, Great King," said Eodan.

"You could learn them, I think. See here. This very month I am leading
an expedition against the Tectosages. Their tetrarch has been a
thorn in my side since I took Galatian territory. We have had border
skirmishes, and all the Gallic cantons lean toward Rome and intrigue
against me. They must learn who is master. It will not be a great
war--an outright conquest would alarm the Romans too much at this stage
of things--only a punitive expedition. But the fighting will be brisk
and the booty sufficient. I would like to have you and your Alanic
friend in my following. I think you could serve me well, and you would
gain in both wealth and knowledge."

"I should be honored, Great King," said Eodan. One did not refuse such
an offer, and indeed it could be profitable. And to ride a war-horse
again!

"So be it. We shall talk further. Now, hm, did you say your Grecian
girl was a maiden and wishes to remain so? _I_ would not stand for it!
_I_ took it for granted, till you related otherwise, that you two held
her in common."

"She lifted me from slavery, Lord. It is a small thing to repay her."

"Well, as you wish. If she is indeed learned, she can tutor the younger
children of palace officials." Mithradates grinned. "Meanwhile, you
and the Alan have certain needs. I take it you both prefer women?" He
beckoned his secretary and gave orders.

Morning was not far off when Eodan and Tjorr entered their room,
none too steadily. A maidservant accompanying them woke Phryne, who
came from her chamber wrapped in a mantle. Her eyes were dark in the
lamp-glow. "What has happened?" she asked.

"Much," said Eodan. "It is well for us. But now you shall have a
private room, and a servant of your own."

"Why--" Phryne's look turned forlorn. It fell on a couch in the corner
and on the two who sat there. Long gowns and demure veils did not hide
what they were.

She grew white. She stamped her foot and cried out, "You could have let
your wife grow cold in death before this!"

Eodan, weary, startled by her rage, snapped back: "What good would it
be for her ghost if I remained less than a man, just because you are
less than a woman?"

Phryne drew her mantle over her face and departed.

Eodan stared after her, tasting his own words poisonous on his tongue.
But it was too late now--was it not? The slave girl came over to him,
knelt and pressed his hand to her forehead. He saw through the thin
silk that she was young and fair of shape.

He said in an ashen tone, "The King is kind."

"_Da_," muttered Tjorr. "But I know not, I know not. All this we gained
when my hammer was elsewhere. I wonder how much luck is in such gifts."




XVI


Summer had burned hot on the Asiatic uplands, but winter would be
very cold. The day after he left the city Ancyra, Eodan felt the wind
search through clothes and flesh toward his bones. Overhead the sky was
leaden, with a dirty wrack flying beneath it. Dust smoked off harvested
fields. There were not many of these; the rest was wild brown pasture,
cut by tiny streams and bare hills. He was on the edge of the Axylon,
the vast treeless plateau running south to Lycaonia, with little more
sign of man than some sheep and goat herds.

He wrapped his cloak more tightly about him and thought of autumn gold
and scarlet in Jutland, where forests roared on long ridges. Why had
three Gallic tribes left such a country, nearly two hundred years ago,
and wandered hither?

But so they had, conquering Cappadocians and Phrygians until a new
nation stood forth around the Halys. They let the natives farm and
trade as ever, save for taxes and a share in the crop. The invaders
rooted their three tribes in separate parts of the country, each
divided into four cantons with a chief and a judge above it; a great
council imagined it guided the entirety. Mithradates had remarked
once it was no mean feat to combine so carefully the worst features
of a monarchy and a republic. The Gauls shunned cities, holding to
fortified villages clustered around the castles of chiefs. There they
practiced the skills of war, heard their bards and Druids, remained in
fact--under all the proud trumpets--a wistful fragment of the North.

"Maybe the Powers were not so unkind after all," said Eodan. "It might
have been worse for the Cimbri had they overcome Rome."

Tjorr shook his head, puzzled. "You are a strange one, _disa_," he
said. "Half of what you speak these days I do not understand at all."

They trotted on southward, into the wind off the high plains. Some
miles ahead lay the Pontine army, where Mithradates was getting ready
to march home. The lancers who jingled after Eodan and Tjorr were
a detachment sent to fetch certain hostages, who would assure the
behavior of Ancyra's Phrygians as well as of the Tectosagic overlords.
Eodan had recognized the commission, small though it was, as a mark of
royal favor. For himself, he was chiefly pleased that the Greek he had
been studying as chance offered was now good enough to serve him. He
could not live in Asia without learning its universal second language.

Tjorr glanced complacently at his own outfit. Like the Cimbrian, he
wore the garb of a Persian cavalry officer, though he had added thereto
a treasure of golden bracelets. "This has been a good war," he said.
"We have seen new lands and new folk, done some lively fighting--ha, do
you remember how we attacked them at the river, drove them into its
waters and fought them there? And those castles we won were stuffed
with plunder!"

"I saw them," replied Eodan shortly.

He did not know why his mood should be so gray. It had indeed been a
fine campaign, and he had learned more about war and leadership than
he could reckon up--much of it simply from watching Mithradates, who
was a noble chief to follow and often a good mirthful restless-minded
friend to converse with. The battles had gone well--one could forget
the unforgotten during a few clangorous hours of charge and fight
and pursuit--until the Tectosages yielded the terms and indemnities
demanded. He, Eodan, had been granted enough booty to pay the expenses
of Sinope's court; now his own star could follow that of Mithradates
until both, perhaps, lit all the Orient sky.

Nevertheless, winter lay in his soul, and he rode to his King without
gladness.

Tjorr went on, eagerly: "The best of it is, we've not to garrison here
in winter. Back to Sinope! Or Trapezus? There's a city! Do you remember
how we stopped there?" It had been politic to march eastward first,
entering Galatia through the country of the Trocmi, who had already
been subdued; for Rome watched jealously the stump of independent
Paphlagonia that lay between Sinope and Ancyra.

Eodan smiled one-sidedly. "I remember how you hired a bawdyhouse just
for yourself."

"Oh, I invited my friends, of course. A pity the King wished to talk
geography or astronomy or whatever it was with you that night. Still,
we've picked up some nice wenches here and there, not so?" Tjorr sighed
in reminiscence. "Ah, Satalu! She was as sweet and bouncy as a stack
of new-mown clover. Not that I say anything against my concubine in
Sinope, though I may buy another one or two for variety." He rubbed the
hammer at his side. "There's luck in this old maul, I tell you. Maybe
even something of the lightning."

Eodan's thoughts drifted pastward. Perhaps his forebodings were no
more than a recollection--now, when he was not too hurried to consider
it--of how the captured Galatians had stumbled in clanking lines, north
to the slave markets of Pontus.

Or it might be a certain aloneness. Phryne had not understood--maybe
no woman could understand--how a man was driven to one after another,
by the ruthless force of the Bull, merely so that he could sleep
afterward ... when the only one he truly wanted had dwindled to a small
burning star on a windy sea. Wherefore Phryne had coldly avoided him.
In the bustle of an army that made ready to go, he had found no chance
to seek her out and gain back a friendship he missed; there was little
privacy in an Eastern palace. He contented himself with making certain
she would have an honorable, paid position in the household.

Could I write, he thought, my words would have reached her during these
months. But since I lack that great witchcraft, I was only able to make
sacrifices, hoping the gods would bring her a dream of me.

He had offered to many powerful gods: Cimberland's Bull, who was also
in some way Moon and Sun, and Hertha the Earth Mother, whom they called
Cybele down here; even Jupiter and the fork-tongued thunder-snake that
Tjorr invoked. He would have given Mithras precedence, that being
the favored god of Pontus, but the king explained it was forbidden
to call on him unless one had been initiated into his mysteries. And
thereafter: "But you can be instructed this winter, when we have come
home, and I myself will stand as your sponsor. For our hearts are much
alike, Eodan."

The Cimbrian was ready enough to go under the banner of Mithras, who
was not only strong but consoling. He had been born of a virgin through
the grace of Ahura-Mazda the Good, that all his followers might live in
heaven after death--which seemed a better fate than that granted the
puzzled quiet shades of the Greeks. Perhaps Mithras could even call
Hwicca back from the night wind, though Eodan dared not hope it. The
god's midwinter birthday was a cheerful occasion, where men feasted
and exchanged gifts. One day, when evil Ahriman rose up for a last
onslaught, all those warriors whom Mithras had been guesting in heaven
would ride with him to battle.

Eodan thought sometimes that the North might welcome such a god, more
humanly brave than the dark, nearly formless wild Powers of earth and
sky. But it seemed unsure that he would ever again see the North.

"There, now! Shall we enter in the horseman's manner?"

Eodan looked up, blinking to awareness. The camp was in view, not very
far ahead. "Indeed," he said, wondering where the time had gone. It was
mid-afternoon. He signaled his trumpeter, and the call rang out, cold
and brassy in the gray cold light; the wind made it ragged. But the
troopers raised their lances and smote with their spurs. As one, they
came a-gallop under streaming flags, through the tents and a burned
village to the castle walls.

Eodan jumped to the ground and flung his reins at a groom. The captain
of the watch saluted him before the gates. "Let it be known," said
Eodan, "that the Cimbrian has returned from Ancyra as ordered and will
see the king when the king pleases. May the king live forever!"

After quartering the hostages, he walked toward his own tent. There was
much he did not like in Asia, he reflected, and this crawling before
the high, in both words and flesh, was not the least. Mithradates
deserved respect, yes, but a man was not a dog. Nor was a woman an
animal, to be kept for breeding or pleasure alone. A few months of
giggling Eastern wenches had shown Eodan how sheer tedium could drive
so many men to catamites. He thought of Phryne, born a slave, less
chained in her soul than the High Queen of Pontus. It is better in the
North, he thought, overwhelmed by his earliest years. They are still
free folk on Jutland's moors.

"Master!"

Eodan paused before his tent. Tjorr, who had just left him, returned
quickly. A slave bent his knee to him. "Master, the great king would
see the Cimbrian at once."

"What?" Eodan looked down at his mail, flowing trousers, spurred boots
and flapping red cloak--all dulled with dust. Well, Mithradates was a
soldier, too. "I come."

"What might it be?" asked Tjorr, pacing him as he hurried back under
the grassy earth wall. "Has something happened?"

"Surely it has," said Eodan, "or the king would allow me a rest and a
bite to eat first."

"Maybe a new war has begun somewhere?"

Eodan grinned with a sour humor. "We're not so important, you and I,
that we're summoned in person to plan the royal strategy. I think this
concerns us--me, at least--alone."

He paused at the castle gate to surrender his longsword. Tjorr scowled
unhappily. "I shall wait here," he said. "Perhaps my hammer will fend
off bad luck."

Eodan said, with the bleakness of wind and treeless uplands taking him,
"I think our luck has already passed these doors and is waiting inside."

He crossed a flagged courtyard, where guardsmen drilled among the
lesser buildings. The keep was a gloomy stone hall, sod-roofed and
galleried. Beyond its entryroom was a long feasting chamber, where
Mithradates had established his court. Fires burning in pits along the
rush-strewn dirt floor gave some warmth, though not all their fumes
went out the smokeholes. The king had added charcoal braziers and had
hung his lamps from captured swords thrust into wooden pillars carved
with gods. He sat in the canton chief's high seat, which was shaped
like the lap of stag-horned Cernunnos. A robe of Sarmatian sable and
African leopard warmed Mithradates' huge frame; his golden chaplet
caught the unsure light like a looted halo. Around the room gleamed his
unmoving hoplites; a few courtiers and some mustached Gauls huddled at
one end, where a boy plucked an unheeded lyre.

Eodan put his helmet under his arm, strode to the king and bowed to one
knee--a special favor, granted for his blood of Boierik. "What does My
Lord wish from his servant?"

"Stand, Cimbrian." Eodan saw a troubled look on the heavy face. "Today
there came an embassy." Mithradates leaned toward a runner who crouched
under the secretary's feet. "Bring them in."

Eodan waited. The king said slowly: "You have been welcome at court
and camp--not for your knowledge and tales of far places, though they
delighted many hours of mine; not for your sword, though it has sung
me a gallant song; but for something that is yourself. Whatsoever may
happen, Eodan, remember what has been between us. The gods themselves
cannot take away the past."

A door at the far end was flung wide. Two came through it.

One was a man in a toga; Eodan could not see his countenance by the
dim unrestful light. But even through a long, hooded mantle he would
know the shape and gait of the other. His blood pulsed with a quick
unreasonable gladness; he forgot himself in the king's presence and ran
toward her with his hands outstretched. "Phryne!" he cried. Reaching
her, he grasped her by the elbows and looked down into the pale
heart-shaped face and said in his lame Greek: "Now I can tell you with
your homeland's speech how I have missed you."

"Eodan--" She shivered violently, as if winter had come with her all
the way down from the north. "Eodan, my only gift to you is woe."

He raised his eyes, most carefully, and looked upon Gnaeus Valerius
Flavius.

Eodan howled. He sprang back, snatching for his sword, but the empty
belt mocked him. The Roman lifted an arm. "_Ave_," he said. His
closed-mouth smile creased cheeks grown gaunt; Eodan could see how the
bones stood forth in his face.

Eodan remembered the king, motionless on the knees of a conquered god.
He choked back his breath; one by one easing muscles that had stiffened
to leap at a certain throat, he wheeled and marched to the high seat
and prostrated himself thrice.

"Great King whose glory lights the world," he said thickly, returning
to the Latin he could best use, "forgive your slave. This Roman slew my
wife. Give him to me, lord of all the earth, and I will afterward eat
that fire for your amusement if you wish."

Mithradates leaned back. He considered Flavius, who saluted him with
no more respect than a high-born Roman was allowed to show any foreign
despot. Lastly his glance fell upon Phryne, kissing the floor beside
Eodan.

"Who is that?" he asked. Then, with a sudden chuckle of pure
pleasure--the laughter of a little boy shown some wholly unawaited
novelty--"Why, it is the Greek girl who fled with the two men. This I
was not told. Rise, both of you. Woman, explain your arrival here."

Eodan stood up. His jaws were clenched so they ached. He looked across
a few feet at Flavius--no, he would not look--he shifted his eyes to
Phryne. She stood before the king, her bowed head shielding her face,
and said in Greek:

"Merciful Monarch, I am no one, only a slave girl named Phryne, who
escaped from Rome with the Cimbrian and is now free by your grace. May
the sun never set upon you. As the King has heard, this Roman came to
Sinope with armed escort, saying he had a commission to bring back
the Cimbrian. When he learned that Your Majesty was being served by
the Cimbrian down here, he arranged for horses and rode with Pontine
guides--for who would leave a Roman unwatched?--through Paphlagonia and
Galatia to find you. It went as a diplomatic party, but its purpose is
hostile, that the King may be deprived of the Cimbrian's services. All
this I was told through the household. Some of Your Majesty's favor
has come down to me; Your Majesty made rich gifts to all our party
when we arrived, though I was not summoned to thank you. And then
there were my earnings, and some gifts from the parents of children I
instructed. With all this I was able to buy a strong eunuch to guard
me. The captain of the Pontine escort kindly allowed me, on my plea, to
accompany them--"

"Did you have that much money, besides the slave's price?" asked
Mithradates dryly.

"I was to give him my eunuch when we reached the King's camp,"
whispered Phryne.

"And be alone and penniless among soldiers?" Mithradates clicked his
tongue. "Cimbrian, you have a loyal friend indeed. I did not believe
any woman capable of it."

He leaned forward. "Come here, Phryne. Stand before me." His hand
reached out, throwing back her hood, then reaching for her chin to tilt
her face up to his. Eodan saw how the blue-back hair had grown in the
summer--still too short but softly gathered above a slim neck--yes, she
was surely a woman!

"Why was I not told about you before now?" murmured the king.

Flavius said with a tone that gibed at Eodan: "Your Majesty, she
would not speak to me all the trip, but when she found herself--as
Your Majesty phrased it--alone and penniless among soldiers, with no
way into the royal presence, it entertained me, as I hoped it might
entertain Your Majesty, to offer her help and protection which she must
accept. It was at my expressed desire that she was allowed to wait
outside with me." He raised his shoulders and his brows. "Of course,
it might have been more amusing to see what she would have tried to
gain admittance. A woman is never quite penniless; she has always one
commodity--"

Mithradates held Phryne's head, watching the blood and the helpless
anger rise in her. Finally he released the girl. "The Flavius
misunderstood me," he said. "We shall let you speak your case, Phryne."
He nodded toward Eodan. "However, that the Cimbrian may know your
mission, Roman, state it first."

Flavius' head lifted, as though on a spear shaft. His tone rang out,
with more depth and harshness than Eodan had yet heard from him:

"Your Majesty, this barbarian and his associates are more than runaway
slaves. They have murdered free men, even citizens. There is a wise
Roman law that orders that if a slave kills his owner, then all the
slaves of that owner must die. How else shall free men, and their wives
and daughters, be safe?"

"No writ runs here but mine," said Mithradates calmly.

"Your Majesty," pursued Flavius, "the Cimbrian and his allies did still
worse. They committed piracy. And that is an offense against the law of
all nations."

"I have heard this tale," said Mithradates. "I feel it was more an act
of war than of piracy." His teeth gleamed in the same child's delight
as before. "But, if you are the very man whom the Cimbrian overcame,
tell me your story. What happened on that other vessel?"

"We destroyed his mutineers, Great King, and rowed to Achaea, whence
I returned overland as fast as horses would bear me. When the facts
of this outrage were laid before the Senate, it was decided that the
Cimbrian must be punished, did not Neptune strike him down first? But
not until lately did intelligence reach me, who had been given charge
of the hunt, that these outlaws had insinuated themselves into Your
Majesty's grace. I came at once, to free your majesty of such odious
creatures. Now--"

"Enough." Mithradates turned to Phryne. "Well, girl, what is it you
wished so badly to say to me?"

She might have fallen at his feet; but she stood before him like a
visiting queen. Her tones fell soft: "Great King, I would do no more
than plead for the lives of two brave men. My own does not matter."

"For that," said Mithradates, "I shall surely never let you go."

Flavius said with a devouring bitterness: "Your Majesty, the Senate
of Rome does not feel this female slave is of great importance, nor
even the Alanic barbarian. It is not recommended to Your Majesty that
you leave them alive, but I feel the King will soon discover that
for himself. However, the Cimbrian, ringleader and evil genius of
them all, must be done away with. We would prefer he die in Rome, but
otherwise he must die here. I have already presented Your Majesty with
the written consular decree of the Republic. May I say to the Great
King, in the friendliest spirit, knowing that a word to the wise is
sufficient--should I return with this decree unfulfilled, the Senate
may be forced to reckon it a cause for war."




XVII


"You bid me surrender a guest, who has fought well for me to boot,"
Mithradates said gravely. And then, with an imp's grin: "Also, I doubt
the reality of your threat. If the Cimbri were all like this one,
Europe must still be too shaken to go adventuring in the East. Ten
years hence, perhaps ... but no one would hazard so rich a province as
Pergamum just to capture a man. I have read your official documents,
Flavius, and they convey nothing but a strong request."

"Great King, it was never my intention to threaten," answered the Roman
with a smooth quickness. "Forgive clumsy words. We are blunt folk in
the Republic. But of course the King understands that the Senate and
the people of Rome will welcome so vital a token of a most powerful and
splendid monarch's good will toward them. I am authorized to make a
small material symbol of the state's gratitude, to the amount of--"

"I have seen what the bribe would be," said Mithradates. "We shall
discuss all this at leisure tonight." His gaze flickering between
Eodan and Flavius, he chuckled deeply. "There will be a feast at which
you two old friends may reminisce. In the meantime, I forbid violence
between you. Now I have work to do. You may go."

Eodan backed out, taking Phryne's arm at the door. "Come to my tent,"
he said. "You should not have been so reckless as to travel hither."

"I would not hold back from you even the littlest help," she whispered.
She caught at his cloak, and her tone became shrill. "Eodan, will he
give you up to them?"

"I hardly think so," said the Cimbrian. Bitterness swelled in his
throat. "But neither will he give Flavius up to me!"

They started across the courtyard, and the wind snatched at their
mantles. Eodan looked back and saw Flavius emerging from the keep.

"Wait," he said to Phryne. "There are things I would talk about that no
one else has a right to hear."

"You will disappoint the king," she said in an acrid voice. "He is
looking forward to the subtlest gladiatorial contest."

Eodan strode from her. Flavius wrapped his toga more closely against
the cold bluster of the air. He smiled, raising his brows, and stood
waiting; his dark curly hair fluttered. But somehow no youth or
merriment were left in him.

"Will you be kind enough to assault me?" he asked.

"I am not a fool," grunted Eodan.

"No, not in such respects.... Since your life hangs now on the king's
pleasure, you will heel to his lightest whim like any well-trained
dog." Flavius spoke quietly, choosing each word beforehand. "Thus it is
seen--he who is born to be a slave will always be a slave."

Eodan held onto his soul with both hands. At last he got out: "I will
meet you somewhere beyond the power of both Rome and Pontus."

Flavius skinned his teeth in a grin. "Your destruction is more
important to me than the dubious pleasures of single combat."

"You are afraid, then," said Eodan. "You only fight women."

Flavius clenched his free hand. His whittled face congealed, he said
in a flat voice: "I cannot help but smite those women whom you forever
make your shields. Now it is a Greek slave girl. How many more have you
crawled behind, even before you debauched my wife?"

"I went through a door that stood unbarred to all," fleered Eodan.

"Like unto like. Will it console you to know, Cimbrian, that she has
divorced me? For she grows great with no child of mine, a brat I would
surely drown were it dropped in my house."

Eodan felt a dull pleasure. This was no decent way to hurt an enemy,
yet what other way did he have? "So now your hopes for the consulate
are broken," he said. "That much service have I done Rome."

"Not so," Flavius told him. "For I allowed the divorce in an amicable
way, not raising the charges of adultery I might. Thus her father is
grateful to me." He nodded. "There are troublous years coming. The
plebs riot and the patricians fall out with each other. I shall rise
high enough in the confusion so that I will have power to proscribe
your bastard."

It had never occurred to Eodan before, to think about the by-blow of
his women. He had set Hwicca's Othrik upon his knee and named him
heir, but otherwise--Now, far down under the seething in him, he knew
a tenderness. He could find no good reason for it; there was a Power
here. He would have chanced Mithradates' wrath and broken the neck of
Flavius, merely to save an unborn child, little and lonely in the dark,
whom he would never see. But no, those guardsmen drilling beneath the
walls would seize him before he finished the task.

He asked in a sort of wonder: "Is this why you pursue me?"

"I bear the commission of the Republic."

"The king spoke truly--they are not that interested in one man. This
decree is a gesture to please you, belike through your father-in-law.
You are the one who has made it his life's work to destroy me."

"Well, then, if you wish, I am revenging Cordelia," said Flavius. His
eyes shifted with a curious unease.

"I spared you at Arausio. And what was Cordelia to you, ever?"

"So now you call up the past and whine for your life."

"Oh, no," said Eodan softly. "I thank all the high gods that we meet
again. For you killed my Hwicca."

"_I_ did?" cried Flavius. His skin was chalky. "Now the gods would
shatter you, did they exist!"

"Your sword struck her down," said Eodan.

"After you flung her upon it!" shrieked Flavius. "You are her murderer
and none but you! I have heard enough of your filth!"

He whirled and almost ran. Phryne, small and solitary at the gate,
flinched aside from him. He vanished.

Eodan stood for a while staring after the Roman. It came to him
finally, like a voice from elsewhere: So that is why he must hate me.
He also loved Hwicca, in his own way. Indeed the soul of man is a
forest at night.

He thought coldly, It is well. Now I can be certain that Flavius will
never depart my track until one of us has died.

Phryne joined him as he left. As they went mutely from the castle,
Tjorr rushed up to them. "There are Romans come!" he bawled. "A dozen
Roman soldiers in camp.... I'd swear I saw Flavius himself go by....
Phryne! _You_ are here!"

"Have you any further information?" asked the girl sweetly.

They walked toward Eodan's tent, and she explained to the Alan what had
happened. Tjorr gripped his hammer. "By the thunder," he said, "it was
well done of you! But what help did you think you could give us?"

"I did not know," she answered unsteadily, "nor am I certain yet. A
word, perhaps ... one more voice to plead, with a flattering abasement
impossible to Eodan ... or some scheme--I could not stay away."

Tjorr looked at the Cimbrian's unheeding back. "Be not angry with him
if he shows you cold thanks," he said. "There has been a blackness in
him of late, and this cannot have lightened it."

"He has already rewarded me beyond measure," she said, "by the way he
greeted me."

They entered the tent. Eodan slumped on a heap of skins and wrapped
solitude about himself. After some low-voiced talk with Phryne, it
occurred to Tjorr to take her out and show her to his and Eodan's
personal guards, grooms and other attendants. "She is not to be
insulted. Obey her as you would obey me. Any who behaves otherwise,
I'll break his head. D'you hear?"

When they came back it was approaching sunset. Eodan was sitting before
a small pile of silks, linens and ornaments. "A slave brought these for
you, Phryne," he said. "The king commands your presence at his feast."

"The king!" She stared bewildered. "What would the king with me?"

"Be not afraid," said Eodan. "He is only cruel to his enemies."

Tjorr's eyes glittered. "But this is wonderful!" he cried. "Girl, your
fortune may be made! I'll get a female to help you dress--"

When she had gone he muttered, "She did not appear overly glad of the
king's favor."

"She is too frightened on our behalf," said Eodan.

"Do you think she has good reason to fear?"

"I do not know--nor care, if I can only lay hands on Flavius."

As twilight fell, an escort of torchbearers came to bring them to the
castle. Entering the feasting hall, Eodan saw it aglow with lamps. Some
attempt to make it worthy of the king was shown by plundered robes
strewn on the floor; musicians stood in the murk under the god-pillars
and caterwauled. It was no large banquet Mithradates gave this
night--couches for a score of his officers, with Eodan on his right and
Tjorr beyond him, Flavius on the left. Cimbrian and Alan wore Persian
dress, to defy the plain white tunic of the Roman. The rest clad their
Anatolian bodies in Greek style, save that the king had thrown a
purple robe over his wide shoulders.

Eodan greeted Mithradates and the nobles as always, and reclined
himself stiffly. The king helped himself to fruit from a crystal bowl.
"Never before has this place known such an assembly of the great," he
declared with sardonic sententiousness. "And yet our chief guest has
not been summoned."

"Who might that be, Lord of the World?" asked a Pontine.

"It is not our custom that women dine with men," said Mithradates. "We
feel it a corruption of older and manlier ways." That was a malicious
dart at Flavius, thought Eodan. "Yet all you nobles would consider
it no insult to guest a queen; and many philosophers assure us that
royalty is a matter of the spirit rather than of birth."

"Though the Great King shows that when spirit and birth unite, royalty
comes near godhood," said an officer with practiced readiness.

"I am therefore pleased to present to you all a veritable Atalanta--or
an Amazon princess--or even an Athena, wise as well as valiant. Let
Phryne of Hellas stand forth!"

She walked from the inner door, urged by a chamberlain. Her garb was
dazzling--long lustrous gown and flowing silken mantle, her hair and
throat and arms a barbaric blaze of finery. It came as a wrenching in
Eodan that she should look so unhappy. She advanced with downcast eyes
and prostrated herself.

"No--up, up!" boomed Mithradates. "The King would have you share his
place."

Eodan heard a muffled snicker at the table's end. Blood beat thickly in
his temples; what right had some Asiatic to laugh at a Greek? His eyes
ranged in search of the man, to deal with him later. By the time he
looked back, Phryne had reclined beside Mithradates on the royal couch.

"Know," said the ruler in his customary Greek, "she spent her last
wealth and risked life, freedom and honor to journey here from Sinope
that she might plead the case of her comrades. And before then she had
shared the perils of flight from Rome and battle at sea--and she is
learned enough to instruct the children of noblemen. Therefore I say
a queen's heart lies behind those fair breasts, and it shall have a
queen's honor. Drink, Phryne!"

He took up his huge silver chalice and gave it to her with his own
hands. A low, envious gasp sighed down the length of the table.

Phryne lifted her decorous veil to put the cup at her lips. "Ha, ha!"
shouted Mithradates. "See, she is beautiful as well! Let the feast
begin!"

It was no banquet at all, compared to the least meal in Sinope--little
more than a roast ox and several kinds of fowl, stuffed with rice and
olives. No acrobats or trained women being available, some young Gauls
offered a perilous sword dance, and a Phrygian wizard showed such
tricks as releasing doves from an empty box. Thus Tjorr enjoyed it
better than any he had attended before; his guffaws rang between the
guardsmen's shields until even Flavius had to smile a little. Eodan
hardly noticed what passed his eyes and teeth; he was too aware of the
Roman.

When the meal was at last over, an expectant silence fell. Mithradates
leaned toward Flavius. "Your account of your adventures was
ungraciously curt today," he said smiling. "Now we would hear more
fully. You can be no ordinary man, who so endangered the Cimbrian."

"Your Majesty flatters me," said Flavius. "I am a most ordinary Roman."

"Then you flatter your state. Though you belittled it earlier, in
contending that one man might be so great a danger to it."

"Would not Your Majesty alone be the greatest danger to us, were we so
unfortunate as to lose your good will?"

"Ha! Let it not be said your race makes poor courtiers. Your
compliments are only less polished than the orations in which you
describe your own bluffness." Mithradates drained his chalice and set
it down; at once a slave refilled it. His gaze went from Flavius to
Eodan and Tjorr, and back to Phryne. "Surely there is a purpose here,"
he mused. "Lives are not often so entangled. I must take care to reach
a decision that will accord with the will of the Most High."

Eodan sat up. "My Lord," he said raggedly, "give weapons to us two, or
our bare hands, and watch who heaven favors!"

Mithradates murmured thoughtfully: "I have heard you speak of yourself,
Eodan, as a man whom the gods hate."

"For once he spoke truth, Your Majesty," said Flavius. "It would be an
impiety if--if I, at least, suffered him to live."

"Would you meet him in single combat, then?" asked Mithradates.

"It is an uncouth German custom, Your Majesty," said Flavius. "It is
not worthy of a civilized man."

"You have not answered my question."

"Well ... I would meet him, Great King, if there were no better way."

Eodan sprang to his feet. "At once!" he yelled.

"Give me my hammer, and I'll take care of his following!" said Tjorr.

Phryne sat up on the couch. "No!" she gasped.

"Back!" cried Mithradates. His face was flushed with the wine; he
drained a second cup in three gulps. "Back, lie down--I cannot have
this. You are both my guests!"

The room grew very quiet, until only the crackling fires and the heavy
breathing of men had voice. And outside the wind prowled under the
walls.

"This may not be," said the king finally. "I am a civilized man, too.
Let the world be sure I am no barbarian. We shall settle this dispute
by reason and principle. Hear me and obey!"

"The King has spoken," came whispers from around the long room.

"These people sought my roof," said Mithradates, "and it was granted
them to stay. They are under my protection."

"The hospitality of Your Majesty is known throughout the world," said
Flavius. "But no guest may remain forever. Dismiss them from your
presence, Great Lord, and I will wait for them outside your borders."

"You have not yet given me a reason to send them away," Mithradates
told him.

"Your Majesty," said Flavius, becoming grave, "I have charged them with
revolt, murder, theft and piracy. They are foes of civilization itself,
and the Roman state is certain that all civilized men will recognize
that fact. Let me tell the King a tale.

"At their request, the Cimbri sent an embassy to Rome while they were
still in Gaul. Their terms were refused, of course--should we allow
wild men within our borders?--but they were shown about the city.
Has the King heard what they thought most wonderful? The feed bags
on dray-horses! It is truth I tell. They could not take their eyes
off; they laughed like children. They were also shown that Grecian
statue called the Shepherd, which the King has surely heard is one of
our greatest treasures, the image of an old man with all the tragedy
and dignity of age upon him. The wondered why anyone had troubled to
picture a slave so old and lame as to be worthless!"

Flavius leaned forward, gesturing, his orator's voice filling the
hall with richness and warmth. "Great King, beyond our realms are
the barbarians, the howling folk without law or knowledge. We have
thrilled at your exploits when you broke the Scythians; there you
served Rome, Your Majesty, even as Rome served Pontus on the Raudian
plain. Our fore-fathers were not the same, Great King: yours were
Persian shahs and mine were Latin freeholders. But the same mother
bore us--Hellas--and we honor her alike." He pointed at Eodan. "There
he sits--the enemy--who would stable his horses in the Parthenon
and kindle a fire with Homer. It is more that I hunt than this one
barbarian, O Protector of the Greeks. It is barbarism itself."

Stillness fell again. Mithradates drained another cup. Eodan crouched,
waiting for he knew not what. The king looked at him. "What have you to
say to that?" he asked.

Eodan thought dimly, I might play upon his honor, as Flavius did on
his pride. I daresay he would allow me to remain in Pontus the rest of
my life, did I show him a scar or two won in his service. But I am a
Cimbrian.

He said heavily, in his rough Greek: "I ask no more than the rights of
a man, My Lord."

"A barbarian is not a man!" snarled Flavius.

Mithradates shifted the weight on his elbow till he stared down at
Phryne. "Well," he said, "we have one pure Hellene here. What does she
think?"

"A Greekling slave!" exclaimed Flavius. "The King jests. He knows a
slave is even less a person than a barbarian."

Phryne sat up and flung at him: "You were a better man's slave after
Arausio. You needed the whole Roman army to make him yours in turn.
Must we raise ancestors from Hades? Well, then, where were yours when
mine fought at Salamis?"

Mithradates put on a frown. "_Mine_ were in Persian ships," he said.

"Yet now you are called the protector of the Greeks," she answered
promptly. He grinned. "Great King, who deserved better of you--the man
who freed even one little Greek, or the man whose people laid Corinth
waste?"

"I cannot believe you are at feud with all the gods, Eodan," said
Mithradates. "At least one must love you, to send you so fair an
advocate."

He sprawled lionlike, turning his maned head toward Flavius. "These
people are still of my household," he said. "Let no man do them harm.
The King has spoken."

Eodan's heart lifted, however somberly, as Flavius bent his stiff neck.
"I hear and obey, Your Majesty," he mumbled.

"Well," said Mithradates, his solemnity leaping to become genial,
"remain a while. Accompany us back to Sinope. There is much I would ask
of you, and you shall not go home empty-handed. Now fill all flagons
and drink with me!"

Phryne stared at Eodan a moment. Then her face sank into her hands.

"But what is the matter?" said the King. "You have won your cause,
girl."

"Forgive me, Lord. That is why I weep."

"Come, drink of my cup. Those eyes are too beautiful to redden."

She accepted, shakily. Tjorr plucked at Eodan's sleeve. "We seem to've
escaped that snare," he muttered. "Now we'll have to devise one for
Flavius."

Eodan glanced across at the Roman, who was shaking in rage but somehow
achieving mannered discourse with a Pontine officer. "Hm. Perhaps
the King will let me pursue him when he departs.... No, I fear not,
it would be an open act of war. It may be I shall have to wait until
there is actual war with Rome." His fingers strained crooked upon the
cushions. "Give it be otherwise!"

"Make not too free with such wishes," cautioned Tjorr. "They are often
granted, in ways we mortals did not look for."

Eodan drank deep, as it was one means of easing the hate and the
hurt within himself. He saw Flavius do likewise. Mithradates was in
conversation with Phryne; none dared interrupt him. Eodan drifted
about, playing some pachisi with one man--he played badly tonight--and
talking of cavalry tactics with another. Time went.

He heard Mithradates at last, when the deep voice crashed through all
the babble around: "Come with me now."

He swung about, suddenly cold. The king was standing up. Phryne had
risen, too; her hands were lifted, and behind her thin veil he saw
horror.

"What does My Lord mean?" she said, almost wildly.

Mithradates threw back his head and bellowed laughter. "You cannot be
that much a maiden," he whooped. "They only raise them like that in
Asia, for a novelty."

She sank to her knees, so that his bulk loomed up in shadow and she was
only a little heap of gaily colored clothes before him. "Great King, I
am not worthy," she stammered.

"What the skulls and bones is this?" muttered Tjorr at Eodan's ear.
"Her luck has found her and she won't go with it!"

The Cimbrian's gaze swept the hall. Most of the court was too drunk to
heed the byplay; a few watched with lickerish interest. Flavius stood
under a pillar, grinning.

Truly, thought Eodan in the darkness of his head, some god had rewarded
Phryne. A royal concubine was rich and honored; it was by no means
impossible to become a royal wife; and Mithradates, they said, was man
enough to satisfy all his harem. The Cimbrian took a step forward,
feeling his skin prickle. He grew aware that his hand felt after a
sword he did not have.

Phryne, huddled at the king's feet, looked sideways. Her look met
Eodan's; it was black with ruin. He glided toward her, hardly knowing
what he did. Phryne shook her head at him, and he jerked to a halt. O
Bull of the Cimbri, what Power used his limbs tonight?

"You have shown yourself well worthy," said Mithradates on an impatient
note. "Rise and come."

Perhaps only Eodan saw her lips tighten. She beat her head on the
floor. "Lord, forgive your slave. The Moon forbids me."

"Oh. Oh, indeed." Mithradates stepped back, a primitive unease on his
face. "You should have told me that earlier."

"I was too bedazzled by My Lord," she said. Her regained wit bespoke
some resolution taken. Eodan wondered with a chill what it had been.

"Well ... rise." Mithradates stooped for her hand and pulled her up as
if she were weightless. She stood trembling before him. "A week hence,
my tent will be decked with kings' robes for you," he said. "In the
meantime, you shall have a tent and servants of your own, and ride in
the Tetrarch's litter."

"Great King," she whispered--had Eodan not been close, he would not
have heard it--"if your handmaiden should in any way be displeasing
to you ... should somehow wrong Her Lord ... you will not hold it the
fault of her friends? They knew nothing of me save that I waited in
Sinope to do the King's will, even as they wish only to do it."

"Indeed," said Mithradates roughly. "I am no fool. And have I
not raised my shield above them?" He clapped his hands. "Let the
chamberlain see to her well-being. Find me a couple of Gallic girls for
tonight."

Phryne went past Eodan. She threw him only the quickest of glances, but
never had he seen a look more lonely. The hurried whisper drifted to
him: "Do not be troubled on my account. I do what is best. Make your
own way in the world."

He stared after her. The Power drained from him, he felt tired and
empty. He heard Tjorr rumble answer to Mithradates: "No, Lord, I'm sure
she's not one of these women who hate the touch of men, even if she has
stayed maiden uncommonly late. Haw! On the contrary, Lord, the man she
likes will have enough to do!"

"I thought so myself," said Mithradates. "It is a good omen, that she
was kept for me alone."

It went through Eodan like a sickness--they dared speak thus of his
oath-sister! He would have challenged the king himself if--if--An exile
ate bitter bread. He had only changed one slavery for another.




XVIII


In the morning, after a few dark hours of wakefulness or nightmare--he
was unsure which--Eodan rose to take up his officer's duties. The
Pontines would start home at dawn the next day; though the army itself
could have struck camp in an hour, its train of plunder, captives and
tribute was something else. Eodan was glad enough to lose himself in
a whirl of horses. Now and then he glimpsed the Romans, fully armed
before their little resting place--no more than a decury, and yet they
had crossed half Asia to make a demand upon the king in his host. It
came to him, even in his anger, that he was honored to have one child
who would be Roman.

This day was also cold and blustering. Dust flew about his boots, up
into his eyes and nose and gullet; the clash of iron and brass had a
somehow wintry sound. Up over the Axylon bulked monstrous blue-black
clouds with rain or snow in their bellies, but the earth remained
mummy-dry. Tent canvas cracked in the wind.

About mid-morning Eodan saw a royal runner weave between the mules
whose roundup he was overseeing. He thought nothing of it until the boy
plucked at his foot. Then he looked down from the saddle and heard:
"Master Captain, the king commands your instant attendance."

"I hear and obey," said Eodan's training. He snapped an order to a
younger horseman to continue the task and trotted through the scurry of
the camp. Inwardly he felt a tightening. What would the ruler want of
him now?

When he yielded his sword he felt wholly alone. He had not even a
mail-coat today, only dirt-streaked tunic and breeches in the Persian
manner, a plumed helmet to mark his rank. The guards at the gate
squinted against wind and dust, making their faces somehow inhuman.
Eodan crossed the courtyard and entered the keep.

The hall was nearly empty; one never thought of the rigid troopers
around the walls, of the secretary with tablet and stylus or the
runners crouched at his feet. Mithradates paced before a fire-pit,
where flame welled up. He himself was Persian clad; a ruby upon his
brow gleamed like a red third eye. He wore a dagger at his hip; from
time to time he half drew it and then snicked it back into the sheath
as though into an enemy's heart.

Eodan advanced until he caught the royal glance and made his usual
obeisance.

"Down on your face, barbarian!" roared Mithradates.

That was no moment to haggle about pride. Eodan threw himself flat.
"How have I offended My Lord?" The upsurge of his own wrath came to him
as a shock. He had thought this man was his friend.

"Where is the woman Phryne?" the voice thundered over his head.

Eodan leaped to his feet. "Is she gone?" he shouted.

"I gave you no command to rise," growled Mithradates.

"Is she gone?" yelled the Cimbrian again, out of a feeling that fire
had touched him.

Mithradates stared at him for a long while. Slowly, the king's visage
softened. "Then you do not know?" he asked quietly.

"By my father's ghost, Lord, I swear I do not."

"Hear, then. Her maids entered her tent this morning to help her
arise. She was not there. The eunuch on guard says he knows nothing.
I believe him, though he shall still drink poison for his stupidity,
and be pardoned only if my new antidote saves him. There was a hole
in the tent, at the rear; she must have slashed it with a knife among
her possessions. When word of this finally came to me, I had inquiries
made. An under-groom of your own, Cimbrian, says she came to him in
the night, demanding horses, clothing, arms and food, and rode off. He
says he had received orders to give her whatever she wished without
question."

"That is true, Great King, but--I never thought--I never--Why would she
have gone, whose destiny had just blossomed?"

"And into the Axylon! She was last seen riding south on the road into
the Axylon!"

"Surely there is witchcraft here," said Eodan. "She never showed any
sign of madness, Lord. An evil spirit must have seized her, or some
spell--"

Inwardly, coldly, his mind raced and dodged, like a hare with wolves
behind. He did not know what might haunt these dreary plains; perhaps
she was indeed harried out by a troll. He was thinly surprised that he
did not cower at the thought, as once he would have done, but wished
only to find that creature and sink iron into it. Yet maybe she had
done this of her own will, for some reason unknown to him. He found it
hard to imagine his cool Phryne, who knew what the stars were made of,
seized by some misshapen Phrygian shadow; or was it just that he dared
not imagine it?

Whatever the truth, he wanted to go after her himself. No yapping
Asiatics would carry her back in ropes to the king's bed. It was not
meet!

Eodan's green gaze narrowed upon Mithradates. He saw the terrors of a
thousand generations, who had muttered in dark huts and brewed magic
against a world they peopled with demons, flit over the lion-face. Let
him dissect as many criminals and cast as many learned horoscopes as he
wished; Mithradates remained only half a Greek.

"They deal in black arts here," said the king. His finger traced a sign
against evil, the Cross of Light that stood on the banners of Mithras.
"I'll hale the wizard we saw up onto a rack before this hour is out."

A scheme sprang into Eodan's head. His heart leaped with it.

"Or the Romans?" he said.

"What? No, their law forbids magic."

"I have seen much Roman law broken by Romans, Great Master. Also, this
may not be sorcery after all; it may be some trick of theirs."

Mithradates whirled on a runner. "Bring me the Flavius," he rapped.

Thereafter he paced, up and down, up and down; the only noise being his
boots thudding, the fire that hissed in the pits and the wind whining
outside. There was much smoke in the hall today; it stung tears from
Eodan's eyes.

He thought back to the night before ... how small she had been, under
the tower which was the king ... and why had she been so afraid that
his displeasure with her might be visited on her comrades? When the
king tired of a concubine, even if she had only been with him one
night, he did not rage about it. He always had enough women. He gave
her to some noble, as a special mark of favor, and of course the noble
would never be anything but gentle toward such a token. Usually he made
her his chief wife. So Phryne's luck had come golden to roost on her
shoulder, by the mere fact of a royal command to bed.

Yet she had looked upon Eodan with desolation. And she had thrown him a
final furtive word, not to trouble himself about her, for she would do
what was best.

He thought, stiffening: It was so little to her liking, to enter a
harem, that she rode forth alone. Out there is a land of wolf, bear,
lynx and herdsmen wilder than they; south are Lycaonia and Parthia,
where a woman is also only an animal. If she is not slain along the
way, there will come a time when she must turn her dagger against
herself.

Flavius entered. "Hail, King of the East," he said. He saw Eodan and
stopped. The Cimbrian remained unmoving.

Flavius bit his lip. Then: "How may I serve Your Majesty?"

"You can tell me what you know of Phryne's vanishing," spat Mithradates.

"What?" Flavius took a step backward. His eyes flickered to Eodan, then
returned--and suddenly a faint smile quivered upon his mouth.

"I know nothing, Lord," he murmured. "Yet I would venture that she fled
in the night?"

"It is so told," Mithradates answered. "Is this any work of yours?"

"Of course not, Great King! I suggest--"

"He _says_ it was not caused by him," snapped Eodan. "Yet My Master
knows he was never a friend to me or mine. Nor is Rome itself a friend
of Pontus. What better way to harm us all at one blow?"

Flavius looked at Mithradates, who rumbled like a beast in the arena.
Then, slowly, the Roman's ruddy-brown eyes sought Eodan's, held them
and would not let go. "This was your plan to strike at me, was it not?"
he murmured.

"I know nothing of it!" shouted Eodan. "I only know--"

Flavius shook his head, smiling. "Cimbrian, Cimbrian, you have laid
down your natural weapons and tried a womanish trick. You will gain no
victory with it. There is never any luck in demeaning oneself."

Eodan sought for words, but he found only a black mist of his rage
and fear. And of his shame--that he should have tried to use Phryne's
plight as a dagger in a Roman back. Yes, he thought, shaken, I have
called down evil upon myself and now I must somehow endure what comes.

Flavius turned back to Mithradates. He flung out speech as crisp as
though to an army: "Great King, you are insulted by so clumsy an
attempt at dividing me from your royal favor. Is it not likelier that
this man, who knows the girl--we have only his word and hers that she
is even a maiden--this man plotted with her to flee? Surely she had
more chance to conspire with him and his friend than me; the caravan
master who brought us here from Sinope will testify that she shunned me
the whole trip, whereas she was in Eodan's tent yesterday afternoon.
And would she go out into that desert with no hope of succor? Would
she not assure herself of an accomplice, a captain who could ride out
from the army whenever and wherever he wished--to bring her food,
protection, ultimately to smuggle her back?"

Mithradates hunched his thick frame. His knuckles stood forth white on
the knife hilt; he glared with three red eyes at Eodan and hawked out:
"What have you to say?"

"That I serve the King and this Roman does not," answered the Cimbrian
frantically.

He felt himself driven back by Flavius' marching phrases: "Protector
of the East, there is a simple explanation for what has occurred.
Rather, there are two. First, the barbarian and the Greekling feared
what would happen when you, their master, learned she had lied to you
and was only the leavings of a runaway slave. Thus he sent her out and
will try to lead her back in the wake of the army; she may live with
him, disguised, in Sinope itself; or conceivably he lured her forth
with some such promise, murdered and buried her. Second, it is possible
that he himself speaks truth for once, and it was her decision alone
to flee. Like unto like--she, a slave born, would rather lie with some
Phrygian goatherd than with the King!"

Mithradates bellowed, as though he had been speared. He seized a lamp,
broke its chains with a jerk and hurled it into the fire-pit. When
his working face came under Eodan's eyes, the Cimbrian knew where he
had seen such a look before--in small children, about to scream from
uncontrollable rage.

"She will follow that lamp into the flames," said the Pontine. It was
almost a groan.

"The Roman lies!" Eodan stalked toward Flavius, raising his hands. The
worn eagle face waited for him with a smile of mastery. "I will tear
out his throat!"

Remembering himself, he turned about and cried: "We do not know it was
not witchcraft, Lord."

Mithradates swallowed hard. He beat a fist into his palm, walked back
and forth under the twisted Celtic gods and, inch by inch, drew a
cover across his wrath. Finally his giant striding halted. He searched
Eodan's countenance somberly and asked, "Will you swear, by all which
is holy to you, you have never known her body, and this is no work of
yours?"

"I swear it, My King," said Eodan.

"A barbarian's word," jeered Flavius.

"Be still!" crashed the voice of Mithradates. "I know this man."

Then for a while longer he brooded. "Or does any man know another, or
even himself?" he asked the wooden gods.

Decision hardened over the moltenness in him. "Well," he said heavily,
"it seems that she went because of something in her own will, or an
enchantment. In neither case is she a fit vessel for royal seed. Let
the Axylon have her."

Eodan's muscles began to ease. He thought, in a remote part of himself:
Flavius turned my own foolishness against me, but perhaps Phryne left
her good genius here to watch. For now it has all become as she must
have wished--herself riding off unpursued and no disfavor caused Tjorr
or me.

"She is only another female, after all," said Mithradates. "I could
send men to fetch her back and let her die an example, but it is
unworthy of a civilized man."

"She would doubtless kill herself when your riders came in view, Your
Majesty," said Flavius. "Unless, of course, the barbarian here were
sent after her--"

"Would you truly split him from me?" croaked Mithradates. Sweat studded
his face; Eodan knew suddenly what a combat the king was waging in
himself. "Go, both of you!"

"At once, Your Majesty," said Flavius. "The Lord of the East is wise,
knowing that if she fled in rebelliousness she will be most amply
punished. A herdsman who spied her from afar would know how to stalk
her and pounce unsuspected." He bowed a little toward Eodan. "If the
King permits one more word from me, I should like to withdraw my hints
as to treason by the barbarian. It is clear that he has abandoned the
girl to the Axylon. So if ever he did conspire with her, he is now
aware of his rightful duty toward his true benefactor."

The fires burned higher in the king's eyes. His tone cracked the barest
trifle: "So. Let neither Cimbrian nor Alan leave the army, even for
minutes, until we come home." His lips writhed upward. "It is not that
I doubt your oath, Eodan--" But you do, mourned a thought through the
Cimbrian's upsurging wrath, you do! Flavius knows well how to sow
dragon's teeth--"merely to silence tongues."

Eodan saw Flavius waver; the hall and its grinning gods became unreal.
He threw back his head to howl.

And then everything drained from him. He stood empty of anger, or hate,
or even sorrow. There was only a road, with night at its end, and the
knowledge that he must walk it or cease to be himself.

"Lord," he said, "let your servant depart."

Mithradates started. "What do you mean?"

"I was honored to serve the Great King, but it cannot be any more. Let
me go out upon the Axylon."

Flavius caught a gasp between his teeth. Mithradates drew his knife
in a hand that shook. The slaves at the room's end cowered back into
shadow; some half-sensed ripple went along the lines of guardsmen, and
all their eyes swung inward toward Eodan.

"I must thank the Roman," he went on. "I would have let her die out
there, or worse than die. He showed me my shame. I am not certain why
she is gone: it may be a spell cast on her or it may be of her own
choosing, for some reason I do not understand. But she watched over me
while I slept among foemen. I cannot offer her less now than my own
help."

"You--would bring her back--here?" Mithradates said it with a
stubbornness that dug in its heels. He would not believe anything else.
"Well, perhaps so--"

"With the Alan kept hostage for his return, Your Majesty," put in
Flavius.

Eodan shook his head. "Tjorr has nothing to do with this, My Lord. That
is why I ask leave to depart the King's service. I do not think it
likely Phryne wishes to return hither."

"And you would set her will above mine?" asked Mithradates in a stunned
voice.

"What I would like," said Eodan, "is that you give her freely into my
hands, so that I could bring her back here and let her do or not do
whatever she wished. But I have no art of wheedling; I ask merely for a
dismissal."

"You will get your head on a gatepost!" exclaimed Flavius in a blaze of
victory.

Mithradates stood stooped, his breath rattling in his lungs. His head
swung back and forth, as though he were a bull looking for a man to
gore.

Suddenly he leaped forward, and his knife flashed. Eodan stepped aside.
The knife struck a pillar, drove in and snapped off short. "Guards!"
bellowed the king. "Seize this traitor!"

Eodan stood quietly. Hands fell upon him, spears touched his ribs.
He glanced at Flavius. The Roman laughed aloud, bent close while
Mithradates screamed and shredded his cloak, and whispered, "Did you
think, you fool, he would let you go? You have all but said before
his household, Phryne left because she would not be taken by him. You
insulted more than the king's majesty, you insulted his manhood!"

"I knew what I said," Eodan answered.

Mithradates raged up, flung Flavius and a guardsman aside, and smote
the Cimbrian's face with his hand.

Eodan shook a ringing head, licked the blood that ran from his mouth
and said in Greek, "I did not know it was the custom of civilized men
to strike a guest."

Mithradates fell back as though from a sword thrust.

Then for a while he paced, snarling and mewing. Flavius began to talk,
but a lion roar silenced him. "Wine!" said the King at last. A slave
hurried up with a flagon. Mithradates snatched it, kicked the kneeling
man in the stomach, drained the cup and crumpled its heavy silver
between his fingers.

"Another," he commanded.

It was brought him. He drank it with more care. He flung himself onto
the high seat, slumped for a while, looked up into the darkness above
the rafters and finally began to laugh. It was a raw, barking laugh,
with little humor, but at the end he stood up and spoke calmly.

"Release him," he said. The guards fell back, and Eodan waited.
Mithradates folded his arms. "After this," he continued, almost in
a light tone, "you will not care to stay. It is a delicate question
whether you are my guest, my soldier or my slave, but civilized people
must be generous. Let the Cimbrian take the horse, the arms and the
monies he got from me. Let him ride off wherever he wishes, so he come
not back to this army." The wind piped around the hall; the fire-pits
roared. "Well, begone!" cried Mithradates.

Eodan bent his knee and backed out, as though he were leaving on some
royal errand. And would the Powers it were so, he thought dully,
knowing a wound took hours to feel pain.

He heard Flavius say, in a voice that quivered: "Great King, will you
also let this guest depart?"

As if from immensely far away, the voice of Mithradates came: "There is
a destiny here. I would stand in its way if I dared--but I am only a
man, even I.... Tomorrow at dawn, when we march north, you may quit the
camp." An animal scream: "Now leave my eyes! All of you! Every man in
here, leave the King to himself!"

They streamed out, almost running, terror written beneath the bright
helmets; for the king sat at a heathen god's feet and wept.

Eodan saw Flavius stalk toward his own tent. They exchanged no words.
He went to his place, clapped for a groom and donned his Persian
war-garb. A saddled gray stallion was led forth. Eodan sprang upon it
and trotted quickly from camp.

He would follow the highway south, hoping for a sign.

An hour afterward, when the Pontine army was only smoke on a gray
horizon, he saw the dust cloud behind. It neared, until he could see
the black horse that raised it, and finally he heard the drumbeat of
its hoofs--and Tjorr's red beard flaunted itself in the wind.

"Whoof!" said the Alan, pulling up alongside him. "You might have
waited."

Eodan cried aloud, "It was not needful. You should have stayed where
your luck was."

"No--now, what luck would come to a man that forsook his oaths?" said
Tjorr. "I was weary of Pontus anyhow. Now we will surely drink of my
Don again."




XIX


"Since gossip brought you the tale so swiftly," Eodan said, "you must
also have heard the Romans will be after us at dawn tomorrow. They have
money, and the Gauls here favor them; they'll hire guides, dogs and a
string of remounts."

"I have hunted and been hunted on plains before now," replied Tjorr. "A
flock of sheep to confuse the scent, a trackless waste as soon as we
leave this road--Oh, we can race them all the way to Parthia with good
hope of winning."

"But that is what we may not do, and why you had best return before the
King learns of your absence. I left only on Phryne's account. I shall
have to find her before undertaking such a trip, and it may consume all
the time between me and the pursuit."

Tjorr cocked an eye at him knowingly. Eodan felt his wind-beaten face
grow hot. He said angrily, "She is my oath-sister. Did she think I
would forget what that means?"

"_Da_," nodded the Alan, "or she would have given herself to
Mithradates with no fuss." He squinted down the rutted dirt road, which
wound among boulders and sere grass until it lost itself in stormy
black clouds. "Now our task is to trail her, and she would have made
herself hard to trail. We can only follow this, I think, till we come
on someone who's seen a boyish-looking horse archer go by ... for thus
I take it she equipped herself."

"So my groom told me, and he was too frightened to make up a lie. Come,
then!"

They jingled through unspeaking hours.

At day's end they passed a goatherd in a stinking wool tunic and
knitted Phrygian cap. He gave them a sullen look and mumbled his own
language, which they did not understand, through greasy whiskers.
Eodan felt grimness. Bad enough to be entering wilds where few if any
could speak with him; but this was also a land where the half-Persian
warriors had made themselves hated. He thought, as darkly and coldly as
the whistling twilight, that Flavius might well overhaul him tomorrow
before he had any word of Phryne. He might be wholly doomed; the gods
feared proud men.

Well, if such was his destiny, he would give no god the pleasure of
seeing him writhe under it.

"_Ho-ah!_" cried Tjorr.

Eodan looked up from his thoughts. The Alan pointed westward, where a
single dirty-red streak beneath steel and smoke colors marked sunset.
"A horse out there," he said. Eodan spied the beast; it was trotting
wearily north over the plain.

Horror stood up in him and screamed. He clamped back an answer of his
own, struck spurs into his mount and left the highway. The wind snapped
his cloak and tried to pull him from his seat. Once his horse stumbled
on a rock, unseen in the gloom, but he kept the saddle, swaying lightly
to help the animal muscles that flowed between his knees. And so he
drew up to the other horse.

It was a chestnut gelding with silvered harness; a light ax was
sheathed at the saddlebow--thus did the riders of Pontus equip
themselves. The beast shivered in the heartless wind; its tail
streamed, but the mane was sweat-plastered to a sunken neck. Worn out,
it groped a way back toward the king.

Eodan felt as if the heart had been cut from him, leaving only a
hollowness that bled. "Hers," he said.

"None else," said Tjorr. "A lone alien, with arms and armor worth ten
years of a shepherd's work ... a sling ... and the steed bolted--" He
looked down upon his useless hands. "I am sorry, my sister."

Eodan let her horse go. He began to follow the way it had come, as
nearly as he could judge. He would not leave Phryne's bones to whiten
on this plain. Surely the gods cared for her, if not for him. They
would lead him to her and grant him the time to make a pyre and a cairn
and to howl over her.

Dusk thickened. After some part of an hour, he heard a furtive
scuttering in the grass. He rode after it, and a naked man squeaked
forlornly and dodged from him. It was a Phrygian, wholly bare; he had
not even a staff, but he clutched something to his breast as he ran.
Eodan drew rein and watched him go.

"What happened to him?" asked Tjorr, clasping his hammer; for this was
an uncanny thing to meet on a treeless autumnal plain at nightfall.

"I do not know," said Eodan. "Robbers--the same who killed Phryne?--or
some trolldom, perhaps, for we are in no good country. We cannot speak
with that man, so best we leave him alone to his weird."

They trotted on. But it grew too dark to see, and Eodan would not risk
passing by his oath-sister. In the morning the kites would show him
from afar where she lay. Then the Romans would come, and he would stand
by her grave and fight till they slew him.

"I would like a fire," said Tjorr. He fumbled in the murk, caring for
his horse. "The night-gangers would stay away."

"They will anyhow," Eodan told him. "It is not fated that we should be
devoured by witch-beasts."

Tjorr said, with awe heavy in his tones: "I will believe that. You are
something more than a man tonight."

"I am a man with a goal," said Eodan. "Nothing else."

"That is enough," said Tjorr. "It is more than I could bear to be. I
dare not touch you before dawn."

Eodan rolled himself into the saddle blanket, put his head on his
wadded cloak and lay in cold, streaming darkness. The earth felt sick,
yearning for rain, and the rain was withheld. He wondered if some of
the lightning Tjorr called on had indeed been locked up in the hammer.
When they died tomorrow, the rain might come; or perhaps, thought
Eodan, the first snow, for he is the rain but I am the winter.

I am the wind.

He lay listening to himself blow across the earth, in darkness, in
darkness, with the unrestful slain Cimbri rushing through the sky
behind him. He searched all these evil plains for Phryne; the whole
night became his search for Phryne's ghost. There were many skulls
strewn in the long dead grasses, for this land was very old. But none
of them was hers, and none of them could tell him anything of her;
they only gave him back his own empty whistling. He searched further,
up over the Caucasus glaciers and then down to a sea that roared under
his lash, until finally he came riding past a bloody-breasted hound,
through sounding caves to the gates of hell; hoofs rang hollow as he
circled hell, calling Phryne's name, but there was no answer. Though
he shook his spear beneath black walls, no one stirred, no one spoke,
even the echoes died. So he knew that hell was dead, it had long ago
been deserted; and he rode back to the upper world feeling loneliness
horrible within him. And centuries had passed while he was gone. It
was spring again. He rode by the grave mound of a warrior named Eodan,
which stood out on the edge of the world where the wind was forever
blowing; and on the sheltered side he saw a little coltsfoot bloom, the
first flower of spring.

Then he rested with gladness. The earth turned beneath him; he heard
its cold creaking among a blaze of stars. Winter came again, and
summer, and winter once more, unendingly. But he had seen a coltsfoot
growing....

"There is light enough now."

Eodan opened his eyes. The gale had slackened, he saw. The air felt a
little warmer, and the wind had a wet smell to it. Southward, the world
was altogether murk. It must be snowing there, he thought dreamily. The
wind would bring the snow here before evening. Strange that the first
snow this year should come from the south. But then, perhaps the land
climbed more slowly than the eye could see ... yes, surely it did, for
he had heard that the Taurus Mountains lay in that direction.

"The Mountains of the Bull," he said. "It may be an omen."

"What do you mean?" Tjorr was a blocky shadow in the wan half-light,
squatting with a loaf of bread in his hands.

"We must cross the Mountains of the Bull to reach Parthia."

"If we live that long," grunted the Alan. He ripped off a chunk of
bread, touched it with his hammer and threw it out into the dark.
Perhaps some god or sprite or whatever lived here would accept the
sacrifice.

"That is uncertain," agreed Eodan. He shivered and rolled out of his
blanket. "Best we be on our way. The enemy will start at sunrise."

Tjorr regarded him carefully. "You are a man again," he said. "A
mortal, I mean. You are no more beyond hope, and thus not beyond the
fear of losing that hope. What happened?"

"Phryne lives," said Eodan.

Tjorr reached for a leather wine bottle and poured out a sizable
libation. "I would name the god this is for, if you will tell me who
sent you that vision," he said.

"I do not know," said Eodan. "It might have been only myself. But I
thought of Phryne, who is wise and has too much life in her to yield
it up needlessly. She would have known that one Pontine soldier, on a
single jaded horse, would invite a race between robbers and Romans. But
who heeds a wandering Phrygian, some workless shepherd?" He laughed
aloud, softly. "Do you understand? She stopped that man we saw--at
arrow point, I would guess--and made him lay down all his garments. She
could make her wish clear by gestures. Doubtless she flung him a coin;
I remember how he held something near his heart. When he had fled, she
rode on until her horse was too tired to be of use. Then she buried her
archer's outfit, taking merely the bow and a knife, I suppose, and went
on afoot."

Tjorr whooped. "Do you think so? Aye, aye--it must be! Well, let's
saddle our nags and catch her!" He ran after his own hobbled animal.
When he had brought it back, he looked at Eodan for a moment in a very
curious way.

"I am not so sure the witch-power I felt last night has left you,
_disa_," he murmured. "Or that it ever will."

"I have no arts of the mage," snapped Eodan. "I only think."

"I have a feeling that to think is a witchcraft mightier than all
others. Will you remember old Tjorr when they begin to sacrifice to
you?"

"You prattle like a baby. To horse!"

They moved briskly through the quickening light, Eodan ripping
wolfishly at a sausage as he rode. Now Flavius was going forth to hunt.
The Cimbrian would need strength this day.

The brown grass whispered; here and there a leafless bush clawed in
an agony of wind. Mile after mile the sun, hidden by low-flying gray,
touched the Axylon, until finally Eodan and Tjorr rode in the full
great circle of the horizon. A hunter could see far in this land.

They spied a sheep flock, larger than most, but spent no time on its
watchers. Phryne would be able to see at a distance, too; the need was
to come within eye-range of her. Close beyond, Eodan discerned what
must be the home of the owner or tenant or whoever dwelt here. It was
better than usual, being not of mud, but was still only a small stone
house--windowless, surely with just one room, blowing smoke from a
flat sod roof. There were a couple of rude little outbuildings, also
of moss-chinked boulders, and some haystacks. Nothing else broke the
emptiness, and nothing moved but a half-savage dog. The women and
children must be huddled terrified behind their door as the gleaming
mail-coats rode by. Eodan felt a sudden hurt; it was so strange to him
he had to think a while before he recognized it--yes, pity. How many
human lives, throughout the boundless earth and time, were merely such
a squalid desolation?

A king, he thought, was rightfully more than power. He should be law.
Yes, and a bringer of all goodly arts; a just man, who tamed wild folk
more with his law than his spear--though he was also the one who taught
them how to make war when war was needed--so far as the jealous gods
allowed, a king should be freedom.

And afterward, he thought wryly, when the king was dead, the people
would bring back all the reeking past in his now holy name. But no, not
quite all of it. Doubtless men slid back two steps for every three they
made; nevertheless, that third step endured, and it was the king's.

Phryne could show me how, he thought.

As if in answer, he saw the little figure rise from the bush where it
had lain concealed. Dwarfed by hundreds of yards, she came running in
her Phrygian goatskin and rags; but Eodan's gray horse hammered those
yards away, and he leaped from the saddle and caught her to him.

She held him close, weeping on his cold steel coat. "It was not what I
wanted, that you should come. It was not what I wanted."

"It was what I wanted," he said. He raised her chin until he could
smile down into her violet eyes. "I will hear no reproaches. Enough
that I found you."

"I shall never run from you again," she said. "Where you make your
home, there shall Hellas be."

Hoofs clumped at their backs. Tjorr coughed. "Uh-hm! The enemy is on
his way, with hounds and remounts. And we've only two beasts. Best we
flee while we can."

Eodan straightened. "No," he said. "I, too, have run far enough."




XX


They rode up to the shepherd's house. Phryne struck the dog on the nose
with her staff when it flew at her throat. It ran away, and she strung
her bow and nocked an arrow. Eodan stayed mounted, the German sword in
his hand. Tjorr went afoot to the door and beat on it with his hammer.

"Open!" he bawled. Nothing stirred. He hefted the maul, swung it high
and sent it crashing against the latch. The flimsy bolt cracked in two.
Voices piped with fear in the dark hut. A shaking graybeard barred the
entrance, holding a rusty old ax. Tjorr grabbed him by the tunic and
threw him to the ground, not unkindly. "Out!" he said, gesturing.

They shambled forth. There was only one woman, shapeless in a sacklike
gown, and a dozen children. They looked so unlike that Eodan decided
fatherhood was divided among the three herdsmen who had left their
flock and were hovering timidly half a mile away.

"Must we turn bandit?" asked Phryne in a troubled voice.

Eodan considered her, clad in the same foul garments as the shepherds,
but shining through it. He said bluntly, "This is no otherwise than
smiting that whelp they kept." But because of her look he remembered
certain thoughts about a king and fumbled in his purse. He tossed some
coins to the ground. The grandsire sucked in his breath and crawled to
shaky feet; the three men edged closer.

"Does anyone here speak Greek?" called Eodan. They stared. "Well, you
shall understand my signs then, with a kick if your minds lag, for our
time is short. I will give you ten times the worth of these hovels." He
turned to Phryne. "Do you watch over Tjorr and me. Let them not talk
much among themselves. Shoot the first who shows treachery. And now let
us work!"

Dismounting, he peered into the house. Enough light came through
the door and smokehole to show him a littered earth floor, piled
sheepskins, a few stone tools and clay vessels, a dung fire. But the
ceiling was what he looked at. Branches hauled from some remote forest
many years ago were laid across the walls, and turf piled on them to
make a roof. He nodded. "Thus I thought," he said.

Tjorr rounded up the family and made them watch him. A child whimpered
as he climbed the rough wall to the roof and began throwing off its
sod layers. He flung the child a coin. At once the oldest boy grinned
brashly, swarmed up and helped. Tjorr laughed, clambered down and went
to the shed. Using Phryne's staff for a lever, he pried a few rocks
out of its wall. The same child studied his face carefully and tried
another whimper. Tjorr gave it another coin. The mother giggled. Tjorr
urged her to the task.

Then for some hours he and Eodan made the shepherd folk demolish
their roof and their outbuildings. Phryne paced the dusty grounds,
watchfully, her bow always in her hand. The wind blew from the high
country and the snow clouds moved closer.

There were stout wooden posts at the corners of the shed. Tjorr dug
them out and dragged them to the roofless house. He set two of them
upright on the floor--one close to the entrance and one a yard from the
rear wall; across them he laid a third. Then he put the branch-rafters
back, crossing his heavy timber piece, and heaped a layer of turf on as
before. The shepherd people gaped, blinked, made signs against the evil
eye, which these surely crazed men must have, but helped him after a
few blows. He had them form a line and pass him stones from the wrecked
outbuildings. These he laid on the turf, within a yard of the rear
wall, layer upon layer. Finally the branches beneath sagged, and even
the timber upbearing them started to groan. Quickly, then, he threw
enough sod on his roof of boulders to hide what it was.

Meanwhile Eodan was digging inside the house, at its rear end. He sank
a pit nearly eight feet deep and drove a shaft from that, several yards
outward, so that it ended below the grounds; he left the wooden shovel
there and came back out. Rather his crew of men and children did this,
even as most of the roof work had Tjorr merely overseeing. They would
need their whole strength later.

At the end, hours past the time they began, Phryne looked at the
completed task. She saw merely a shepherd hut with a somewhat thicker
roof than was common, and wreckage behind it. "Do our lives hang on no
more than this?" she asked wonderingly. "Would it not have been better
to flee across the plain?"

"Once they found our trail," said Tjorr grimly, "they could have
changed horse and horse while our own ran themselves dead. No, our
chances here are not good, but I think the _disa's_ plan has made them
better for us than if we played mouse to the Roman ferret"

"One more thing to do," said Eodan. He kindled a stick, went over and
touched it to the haystacks. The shepherds moaned. Eodan grinned, with
a certain pity, and tossed the grandsire his full purse. "There's the
price of your flocks and home and a winter's lodging. Go!" He waved
his sword and pointed south. They stumbled from him, out onto the
plain, looking back with frightened animal eyes. "Why those bonfires?"
asked Tjorr. "Not that I don't like the warmth on this bitter day,
but--"

"Hay could be stacked around the house and lit," said Eodan. "I do not
wish to die in an oven."

Tjorr tugged his ruddy beard. "I had not thought of that. Is it a heavy
burden to be forever thinking, _disa_?"

Eodan did not hear him. He took Phryne's hand in his. "Have I any hope
of making you depart until the fight is over?" he asked.

Her dark head shook. "In all else will I obey you," she said, "but I
have a right to stand with my man."

"I made you a promise once," he began, shaken.

"Oh, I hold you to it," she laughed. It was a very small and lonely
laugh, torn by the wind. "You shall not kiss me against my will. But,
Eodan, it is now my will."

He touched his lips to hers, with an unhurried tenderness; if they
lived, there would be more than this. Tjorr said: "I make out a dust
cloud to the north, _disa_. I think horsemen."

"Then let us go within," said Eodan.

It was dark in the hut; stones covered the smokehole, now, and the
sagging door was closed behind them. They sat on the earth and waited,
Phryne lying in the circle of Eodan's arm. Presently hoofs rang on the
ground outside, and weapons clashed. They heard a dog bark.

"The place seems deserted," said a voice in Latin. "Maybe the fire in
that hay drove its people off."

"And they left two hobbled war-horses?" snapped Flavius. "Look in and
see if anyone lairs."

Tjorr planted himself by the doorway, raising his hammer. The door
creaked open. Chill gray light outlined a Roman helmet and shimmered
off a Roman cuirass. Tjorr struck down, and the helmet gonged. There
was the noise of crunching bones. The man fell and did not move again.

"Here we are, Flavius!" cried the Alan.

Phryne loosed an arrow out the door. Someone cursed. Eodan, glimpsing
horses and men, sprang to the entrance and peered out. Ten living
Romans and a couple of Gauls in battle harness--a dozen men, then,
against two men and a woman.... "I reckon, Eodan," said Tjorr, "you and
I must each strike six blows."

Flavius rode into the Cimbrian's view. His ravaged face stiffened
beneath the plumed helmet. He spoke almost wearily: "I still offer
pardon, even liberty and reward, to your companions. It is only you I
want, and only because you murdered Hwicca."

"I would most gladly meet you in single combat," said Eodan.

"We have been over this ground before," said Flavius. "Let me ask you
instead--do you really wish the Sarmatian and the Greek girl to die on
your account? Would it not be most honorable of you to release them
from whatever vows they gave you--even command them to depart?"

"He is our king," said Phryne from the darkness. "There are some
commands that no king may give."

Flavius sighed. "As you will, then. Decurion, seize them!"

It was a narrow doorway; only one person at a time could go through.
The Roman decurion advanced with an infantryman's long shield to guard
him. Eodan waited. The decurion charged in, behind him a pikeman.
Eodan smote at the first Roman's knees as the pike thrust for his
face. Tjorr's hammer struck from the right, knocked the pike aside and
snapped its shaft against the doorway. The decurion stopped Eodan's
sword-blow, and his own blade darted out. It hit the Persian mail-coat.
Eodan chopped at the arm behind it. He lacked room for a real swing,
but his edge hit. The decurion went to one knee. Eodan struck at his
neck--a hiss and a butcher sound in the air.

Another man followed the decurion, stepped up on the dying officer's
back and thrust mightily. Eodan slipped aside. Overbalanced, the Roman
stumbled and fell into the hut. Tjorr's hammer crashed on his helmet.
One of the Gauls sprang yelling through the undefended entrance. Phryne
fired an arrow, and the Gaul staggered; it had caught him in the arm.
Eodan attacked him from the side, and the German sword went home in his
leg. He fell down, screaming. Tjorr finished him off while Eodan went
back to the doorway.

"Nine men left," he panted.

The Romans stood away from him, where he stood dripping Roman blood. No
one moved for a while, although Flavius dismounted and paced. The other
Gaul came into view. Eodan remembered now that he had heard thumpings
overhead. "This roof is made of stones, Master," said the Gaul to
Flavius. "We can tear it down, I suppose, but not easily. It would cost
us men."

"Likewise to break through the walls," said the Roman. He spoke
impersonally, as though this were no more than a school problem. Eodan
wondered how much was left the man of joy and hope and even hate; the
demons pacing Flavius had bitten him hollow.

"Arrows," he said at last.

Eodan watched them make ready. Four soldiers were shield to shield,
a few yards away. If he made a dash, they would be on him, and even
a Cimbrian could not hold off four good men in the open. Three more
strung their bows and put arrows point down in the ground before
them--slowly, carefully, grinning into Eodan's emotionless face.
Flavius and the Gaul dragged a post from a torn-down shed into view.

When everything was ready, Flavius stepped forth. "Do you see what
I plan?" he called. "You can stand where you are and be filled with
arrows, or you can close that door, which is only leather hinges, and
wait for us to break it down."

"I think we will wait," said Eodan.

He shut the door, and darkness clamped upon his eyes. He heard the
Roman arrows smite and wondered what impulse of fury made Flavius order
them fired. He trod on a dead man's hand and wondered what woman and
child and horse would wait till time's end for its caress.

"Back," he said. "Into the pit, Phryne."

She kissed him, a stolen instant among shadows, and was gone.

Feet thudded outside. The door, which he had not barred, flew open. Two
black blots staggered through, the timber in their arms.

Tjorr met them as they reeled. His hammer boomed on iron. "_Ho-ah!_"
he cried so it rang. "_Yuk-hai-saa-saa!_ Come in and be slain!"

He stood in the middle of the room with Eodan. Each had a Roman shield
and his chosen weapon, maul or longsword. They waited.

Dimly seen, a man pushed close to Eodan. His sword cut low, feeling for
the Cimbrian's legs. Eodan sprang back. His huge German blade whirled
up so it touched the low ceiling. Down it came again, and the shield
edge crumpled under it. Eodan raised his weapon once more, struck home
and felt blood spurt over his hand.

Another shape, another thrust. He caught that one on his own shield,
and the metal glided aside. The Roman shield pushed against the
Cimbrian's right arm, giving no room to use a sword. His hobnailed
boot trampled down on Eodan's foot, and pain jagged in its path. Eodan
drove the boss of his shield into the Roman's face and he heard a
splintering. The Roman sank to the floor, dazed.

There were two more, now, in the belling, clanging gloom. They came in
on either side, to catch him between them. He kicked out to the right,
and his spur flayed open a thigh. As the shield dropped a little in the
man's anguish, Eodan smote. He struck a helmet, but the sheer force of
it snapped the Roman's head down. The man went to his hands and knees
and crawled away.

Eodan had been holding the other off left-handed, keeping his shield
as a barrier. Now, whipping about, he slid the rim aside and then back
again, so that he locked shields with his enemy and held him fast. He
reached over the top with his longsword and drove the point home.

"_Ho-yo-yo!_" chanted Tjorr, battering till it thundered. Eodan might
have let out a Cimbrian howl, but he had no more wish for it. "Back!"
he gasped to the Alan. "Back before they hem us in!"

Eyes were now used to the shifting twilight, the pale gray dazzle of
the doorway. Eodan and Tjorr stood side by side, just in front of the
rear support timber they had erected. Blood ran from their arms and
painted their breasts; blood stained the sweat on them, and it was not
all Roman this time. But men lay stricken before them; Eodan did not
count how many. He looked across three slippery red yards of trampled
earth and saw five men still on their feet. None were unwounded.

But weariness shuddered in him. His sword, nicked and blunted, had not
bitten well; it was an iron bar in his hand, heavy as sorrow. He could
barely hear the deep hoarse breathing of Tjorr, his own heartbeat and
thirsty-throated breath were so loud.

Now that all the hunters were inside his den, it was time to destroy
them.

Flavius crouched by the door. "Form a line!" he rapped. "Wall to wall!
Drive them back and cut them down!"

Four Roman shields filled that narrow room, Flavius standing behind.
Eodan raised his weapon and called, "Will you not try the edge of this
even once, murderer?"

Flavius screamed. For one blink of time, over the advancing shields and
helmets, through the wintry gloom, Eodan looked upon madness. It came
to him that he should not have taunted an unbearable grief. The gods
are too just.

Flavius raised his sword and flung it above the soldiers.

Eodan felt it strike him in the head. He staggered back, suddenly
blinded with his own blood. The pain seared through his skull until he
stood in a world that was all great whirling flame. He thought as he
toppled, This also must a king have known, what it is to be slain.

The Romans cried their victory and moved in on Tjorr. The Alan threw
down his shield, picked Eodan up with one arm, and swung his hammer.
Even as it hit the pillar he had raised, he leaped into the pit and the
tunnel beyond.

The timber slipped sideways. The piece it had helped carry, running
lengthwise, fell. The thin branches cracked, and the roof of stones
came down.

Eodan heard it dimly, from far away. Now the sky has been shattered,
he thought, and gods and demons die in the wreck of their war. A star
whirled by me and hissed into the sea.

He lay in the tunnel, as though in a womb, while the stones buried
his hunters. There followed a silence that tolled. He heard Tjorr and
Phryne calling to each other in utter night. Her hands groped for him.
He lay in her hands and let the pain reach full tide.

It ebbed again. Tjorr dug a few feet upward. Breaking out into the
open, he reached down, hauled forth Eodan and Phryne and whistled at
what he saw.

"Best I catch the horses," he said awkwardly. "You can see to him, can
you not?"

She kissed her man for answer.

Eodan looked up at the sky. "Lie still," whispered Phryne. "Lie still.
It is well. We are safe."

The wind blew softly, almost warm. The first snow fell on his face.
"Have I been badly hurt?" he asked.

She told him plainly: "Your left eye is gone. Now I must love the right
one twice as much."

"Is it no more than that?" he sighed. "I thought my debt was greater.
The Powers are kind."




XXI


North of the city Tanais the Don River wound like a shining snake, like
the lightning itself in a godlike calm, through rolling plains where
horses pastured. In early summer the land blazed blue with cornflowers.

On the west side of the Don, from the Azov Sea as far northward as
their might would take them, dwelt the Rukh-Ansa. They were a proud
folk--warriors, horse breeders, and weapon makers; their women walked
with long fair locks garlanded and dresses of linen wind-blown around
their tall bodies; their chiefs rewarded a bard's song with golden
rings.

Nonetheless, these were ill times, and, when Tjorr the Red came home,
folk sacrificed bullocks in the hope that he carried better luck. From
wide about the chiefs came riding, until Beli's hall rang with their
iron and the ale flowed merrily. They guested Beli not only to hear
what his returned son could tell them of far farings, but because there
had been tales of a king whom Tjorr had brought with him. Sorely did
the Rukh-Ansa need a wise king.

His was a strange band when it rode to the river's east bank and was
ferried across with gifts from awed tribesmen. Tjorr himself did not
lead it, though the redbeard shone in Parthian mail and glittered with
Grecian silver. He was captain of the warriors, several score Alanic
horsemen guarding a rich baggage train; his own wagon was full of gold,
armor and three lovely concubines. When he related how all this had
come to him through the luck in his hammer, many folk went on their
faces; surely that hammer held lightning.

And yet Tjorr acknowledged another man his _disa_--a very tall man with
long wheat-colored hair, a lean withdrawn face, the sun written on his
brow, and one green eye. This Eodan did not dress much like a king; his
mail was serviceable but unadorned; he claimed no trolldom or god-power
in his weapons. Moreover, he had only one wife--a slight girl with dark
hair and violet eyes who rode like a man but nursed a son in her arms
and had one a year older in a carrying-cradle at her saddlebow. Eodan
would not even accept the overnight loan of another woman; he smiled in
his distant way, thanked his host and then returned to his Phryne.

So the Rukh-Ansa wondered at Tjorr ... wondered even if the Phryne girl
were not a witch who had ensnared both him and her husband ... and
then they would come to speak with Eodan, and after a while they would
understand why Tjorr called him King.

Fires burned high in Beli's feasting hall. The chiefs of the Rukh-Ansa
clans sat at table and raised ox horns heavy with silver and beer, to
the honor of Tjorr and Tjorr's lord.

Gray Beli blinked dim eyes at his son. "Will you not tell us the whole
tale of your wanderings?" he asked.

"Not in one day," said Tjorr. "There are many winter evenings' worth
of telling. Let it only be said now that I was sold through Greece and
Italy until I ended in a Roman galley. But then Eodan and Phryne freed
me. We seized the ship and sailed eastward, until we found the court of
King Mithradates."

"The same whose general hurled us back three summers ago from the
Chersonese?" asked Beli.

Tjorr nodded. "Aye. I wish I had fought with you, but at that very
time, as the gods willed it, I was fighting on Mithradates' behalf,
down in Galatia. He was a good master to us. Why did you war on his
realm?"

Beli shrugged. "It was a hungry year. We have had many hungry years
of late; there are too many of us. But the raid failed, and now the
Chersonese is barred to our horses."

"I will have somewhat to counsel you about that," said Eodan. He had
already learned the Alanic tongue, as it was said he knew several
others, besides reading and writing. Yes, a man of deep mind, with
witch-powers he would not show to just anyone--yes, yes.

"Where then did you go?" asked Beli.

"We fell out with Mithradates," said Tjorr, "and for a while we
were two men and a woman, alone on a cold plain. But we had killed
some Romans, who had fat purses. So we bought huts and sheep from
the Phrygians, to live that winter. In spring we continued through
Lycaonia; it is too friendly with Rome these days, so we did not stay,
simply bribed our way past. There are tribes in the Mountains of the
Bull, hunters and warriors, who made us welcome. We aided them and
lived there a year since my king's first son had to be born. Next
spring we came to Parthia with a following of young men and offered
the lord there our services, he being Rome's foe. There we had it well
since the favor of nobles came to us, once they saw what a man they
had in my king. We dwelt in a fine city and had only enough warlike
missions on the border to keep us amused. Yet we longed to be among our
own sort of men again. So this spring we got leave to go, and came up
through Armenia and behind the Caucasus until we found Alans--and thus
your home, My Father."

"Much have you seen," said Beli. The war-chiefs of the Rukh-Ansa
clashed their ale horns under his words.

"I have seen less with two eyes than my King has with one," said Tjorr
humbly. "He has learned the arts of many nations. He would teach his
own people whatever of it they can use."

"Where are your folk?" asked Beli of the stranger.

"North," said Eodan. "They were the Cimbri once. Now they are any who
dwell where heather blooms and beech forests blow."

"We will go north, my king and I, to rule in his land," said Tjorr.
"There are not many dwelling in it. No few of the Rukh-Ansa could
follow us, find new homes in the North and become great."

"Some of the younger ones might," agreed Beli.

"Might?" cried Tjorr. "Why, if I know my clans, they will be at
spearheads over the right to come!"

"Not all," said Beli. "Not even most. For if you fare north you will
become something else than what you are."

"That is true," said Eodan. "Yet what is it to live, than to become
something else?"

"Forgive me," said Beli, "but there are men who would not follow a
one-eyed king."

"Let them stay home, then," snorted Tjorr. "I'll pasture my horses on
the edge of the world if he leads me there."

"Yes," nodded Beli. "Yes. There are such kings. But how did it happen
you lost your eye, Lord?"

Eodan smiled. It was a wry smile, not ungentle, but wholly without
youth. He had known too much ever to be young again. He said, "I gave
it for wisdom."




EPILOGUE


It was told from olden days, and written in the books of Snorri
Sturlason, that the Asa or Ansa folk came from the land of Tanais
to the North. They soon became overlords; from the high hall they
raised at Upsala their power spread, until even the German tribes
drew chieftains and learning from them. For they were good masters,
who brought their new people not only wealth but knowledge. They
gave to the North crafts of both peace and war, such as the building
of longships and the breeding of fine horses, the writing of runes
and the mustering of armies, foreign trade and foreign travel, much
leechcraft and many wise laws. By all this the folk were strengthened
and helped, so that they lifted themselves from rude forest dwellers
to mighty nations who finally overthrew the Roman power and peopled
Europe afresh, in the time of the Wanderings. Above all did they
shape the country called England, and there they kept much of the old
freedom-shielding law that the Asa men first brought.

Every king in the North reckoned descent from the Asa lords, who
themselves came to be worshiped as gods after they died. The first Asa
king was called Odin, and he was the chief of the gods.





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of The Golden Slave, by Poul Anderson

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE GOLDEN SLAVE ***

***** This file should be named 59258.txt or 59258.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/5/9/2/5/59258/

Produced by Greg Weeks, Mary Meehan and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for the eBooks, unless you receive
specific permission. If you do not charge anything for copies of this
eBook, complying with the rules is very easy. You may use this eBook
for nearly any purpose such as creation of derivative works, reports,
performances and research. They may be modified and printed and given
away--you may do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks
not protected by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the
trademark license, especially commercial redistribution.

START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg-tm License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the
person or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph
1.E.8.

1.B. "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the
Foundation" or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg-tm License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg-tm work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country outside the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work
on which the phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

  This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
  most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no
  restrictions whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it
  under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included with this
  eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the
  United States, you'll have to check the laws of the country where you
  are located before using this ebook.

1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg-tm
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format
other than "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original "Plain
Vanilla ASCII" or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg-tm License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
provided that

* You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
  the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
  you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
  to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he has
  agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
  within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
  legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
  payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
  Section 4, "Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
  Literary Archive Foundation."

* You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
  you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
  does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
  License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
  copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
  all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg-tm
  works.

* You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
  any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
  electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
  receipt of the work.

* You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
  distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and The
Project Gutenberg Trademark LLC, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm
trademark. Contact the Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg-tm collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain "Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg-tm work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at
www.gutenberg.org Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is in Fairbanks, Alaska, with the
mailing address: PO Box 750175, Fairbanks, AK 99775, but its
volunteers and employees are scattered throughout numerous
locations. Its business office is located at 809 North 1500 West, Salt
Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up to
date contact information can be found at the Foundation's web site and
official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

For additional contact information:

    Dr. Gregory B. Newby
    Chief Executive and Director
    gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular
state visit www.gutenberg.org/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works.

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg-tm concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.

